The Servile State
By Hilaire Belloc

“… If we do not restore the Institution of Property we cannot escape restoring
the Institution of Slavery; there is no third course.”

T.N. Foulis
London & Edinburgh
1912

To
E.S.P. Haynes

Published October 1912
Printed by Neill and Co., Ltd., Edinburgh.

Synopsis of the Servile State
Introduction

The Subject of this Book:—It is written to maintain the thesis that industrial
society as we know it will tend towards the re-establishment of slavery.

—The sections into which the book will be divided

Section I
Definitions:—What wealth is and why necessary to man—How produced—The meaning of
the words Capital, Proletariat, Property, Means of Production—The definition of
the Capitalist State—The definition of the Servile State—What it is and what it
is not—The re-establishment of status in the place of contract—That servitude is
not a question of degree but of kind—Summary of these definitions.

Section II
Our Civilisation was originally Servile:—The Servile institution in Pagan
antiquity—Its fundamental character—A Pagan society took it for granted—The
institution disturbed by the advent of the Christian Church

Section III
How the Servile Institution was for a Time Dissolved:—The subconscious effect of
the Faith in this matter—The main elements of Pagan economic society—The
Villa—The transformation of the agricultural slave into the Christian serf—Next
into the Christian peasant—The corresponding erection throughout Christendom of
the Distributive State—It is nearly complete at the close of the Middle Ages—“It
was not machinery that lost us our freedom, it was the loss of a free
mind.”

Section IV
How the Distributive State Failed:—This failure original in England—The story of
the decline from Distributive property to Capitalism—The economic revolution of
the sixteenth century—The confiscation of monastic land—What might have happened
had the State retained it—As a fact that land is captured by an oligarchy—England
is Capitalist before the advent of the industrial revolution—Therefore modern
industry, proceeding from England, has grown in a Capitalist mould.

Section V
The Capitalist State in Proportion as It Grows Perfect Grows Unstable:—It can of
its nature be but a transitory phase lying between an earlier and a later stable
state of society—The two internal strains which render it unstable—(a) The
conflict between its social realities and its moral and legal basis—(b) The
insecurity and insufficiency to which it condemns free citizens—The few
possessors can grant or withhold livelihood from the many non-possessors—Capitalism
is so unstable that it dares not proceed to its own logical conclusion, but
tends to restrict competition among owners, and insecurity and insufficiency
among non-owners.

Section VI
The Stable Solutions of this Instability:—The three stable social arrangements
which alone can take the place of unstable Capitalism—The Distributive solution,
the Collectivist solution, the Servile solution—The reformer will not openly
advocate the Servile solution—There remain only the Distributive and the
Collectivist solution.

Section VII
Socialism is the Easiest Apparent Solution of the Capitalist Crux:—A contrast
between the reformer making for Distribution and the reformer making for
Socialism (or Collectivism)—The difficulties met by the first type—He is working
against the grain—The second is working with the grain—Collectivism a natural
development of Capitalism—It appeals both to Capitalist and Proletarian—None the
less we shall see that the Collectivist attempt is doomed to fail and to produce
a thing very different from its object—to wit, the Servile State.

Section VIII
The Reformers and Reformed Are Alike Making for the Servile State:—There are two
types of reformers working along the line of least resistance—These are the
Socialist and the Practical Man—The Socialist again is of two kinds, The
Humanist and the Statistician—The Humanist would like both to confiscate from
the owners and to establish security and sufficiency for the non-owners—He is
allowed to do the second thing by establishing servile conditions—He is
forbidden to do the first—The Statistician is quite content so long as he can
run and organise the poor—Both are canalised towards the Servile State and both
are shepherded off their ideal Collectivist State—Meanwhile the great mass, the
proletariat, upon whom the reformers are at work, though retaining the instinct
of ownership, has lost any experience of it and is subject to private law much
more than to the law of the Courts—This is exactly what happened in the past
during the converse change from Slavery to Freedom—Private Law became stronger
than Public at the beginning of the Dark Ages—The owners welcomed the changes
which maintained them in ownership and yet increased the security of their
revenue—to-day the non-owners will welcome whatever keeps them a wage-earning
class but increases their wages and their security without insisting on the
expropriation of the owners.

Appendix on “Buying-Out”
An Appendix showing that the Collectivist proposal to “Buy-Out” the Capitalist
in lieu of expropriating him is vain.

Section IX
The Servile State Has Begun:—The manifestation of the Servile State in law or
proposals of law will fall into two sorts—(a) Laws or proposals of law
compelling the proletariat to work—(b) Financial operations riveting the grip of
capitalists more strongly upon society—As to (a), we find it already at work in
measures such as the Insurance Act and proposals such as Compulsory Arbitration,
the enforcement of Trades Union bargains and the erection of “Labour Colonies,”
etc., for the “unemployable”—As to the second, we find that so-called
“Municipal” or “Socialist” experiments in acquiring the means of production have
already increased and are continually increasing the dependence of society upon
the Capitalist.

Conclusion




Introduction
The Subject of This Book
This book is written to maintain and prove the following truth:—

That our free modern society in which the means of production are owned by a few
being necessarily in unstable equilibrium, it is tending to reach a condition of
stable equilibrium by the establishment of compulsory labour legally enforcible
upon those who do not own the means of production for the advantage of those who
do. With this principle of compulsion applied against the non-owners there must
also come a difference in their status; and in the eyes of society and of its
positive law men will be divided into two sets: the first economically free and
politically free, possessed of the means of production, and securely confirmed
in that possession; the second economically unfree and politically unfree, but
at first secured by their very lack of freedom in certain necessaries of life
and in a minimum of well-being beneath which they shall not fall.

Society having reached such a condition would be released from its present
internal strains and would have taken on a form which would be stable: that is,
capable of being indefinitely prolonged without change. In it would be resolved
the various factors of instability which increasingly disturb that form of
society called Capitalist, and men would be satisfied to accept, and to continue
in, such a settlement.

To such a stable society I shall give, for reasons which will be described in
the next section, the title of The Servile State.

I shall not undertake to judge whether this approaching organisation of our
modern society be good or evil. I shall concern myself only with showing the
necessary tendency towards it which has long existed and the recent social
provisions which show that it has actually begun.

This new state will be acceptable to those who desire consciously or by
implication the re-establishment among us of a difference of status between
possessor and non-possessor: it will be distasteful to those who regard such a
distinction with ill favour or with dread.

My business will not be to enter into the discussion between these two types of
modern thinkers, but to point out to each and to both that that which the one
favours and the other would fly is upon them.

I shall prove my thesis in particular from the case of the industrial society of
Great Britain, including that small, alien, and exceptional corner of Ireland,
which suffers or enjoys industrial conditions to-day.

I shall divide the matter thus:—

(1) I shall lay down certain definitions.

(2) Next, I shall describe the institution of slavery and The Servile State of
which it is the basis, as these were in the ancient world. I shall
then:

(3) Sketch very briefly the process whereby that age-long institution of slavery
was slowly dissolved during the Christian centuries, and whereby the resulting
medieval system, based upon highly divided property in the means of production,
was

(4) wrecked in certain areas of Europe as it approached completion, and had
substituted for it, in practice though not in legal theory, a society based upon
Capitalism.

(5) Next, I shall show how Capitalism was of its nature unstable, because its
social realities were in conflict with all existing or possible systems of law,
and because its effects in denying sufficiency and security were intolerable to
men; how being thus unstable, it consequently presented a problem which demanded
a solution: to wit, the establishment of some stable form of society whose law
and social practice should correspond, and whose economic results, by providing
sufficiency and security, should be tolerable to human nature.

(6) I shall next present the only three possible solutions:—

(a) Collectivism, or the placing of the means of production in the hands of the
political officers of the community.

(b) Property, or the re-establishment of a Distributive State in which the mass
of citizens should severally own the means of production.

(c) Slavery, or a Servile State in which those who do not own the means of
production shall be legally compelled to work for those who do, and shall
receive in exchange a security of livelihood.

Now, seeing the distaste which the remains of our long Christian tradition has
bred in us for directly advocating the third solution and boldly supporting the
re-establishment of slavery, the first two alone are open to reformers: (1) a
reaction towards a condition of well-divided property or the Distributive State;
(2) an attempt to achieve the ideal Collectivist State.

It can easily be shown that this second solution appeals most naturally and
easily to a society already Capitalist on account of the difficulty which such a
society has to discover the energy, the will, and the vision requisite for the
first solution.

(7) I shall next proceed to show how the pursuit of this ideal Collectivist
State which is bred of Capitalism leads men acting upon a Capitalist society not
towards the Collectivist State nor anything like it, but to that third utterly
different thing—the Servile State.

To this eighth section I shall add an appendix showing how the attempt to
achieve Collectivism gradually by public purchase is based upon an
illusion.

(8) Recognising that theoretical argument of this kind, though intellectually
convincing, is not sufficient to the establishment of my thesis, I shall
conclude by giving examples from modern English legislation, which examples
prove that the Servile State is actually upon us.

Such is the scheme I design for this book.




Section One
Definitions


Man, like every other organism, can only live by the transformation of his
environment to his own use. He must transform his environment from a condition
where it is less to a condition where it is more subservient to his
needs.

That special, conscious,and intelligent transformation of his environment which
is peculiar to the peculiar intelligence and creative faculty of man we call the
Production of Wealth.

Wealth is matter which has been consciously and intelligently transformed from a
condition in which it is less to a condition in which it is more serviceable to
a human need.

Without Wealth man cannot exist. The production of it is a necessity to him, and
though it proceeds from the more to the less necessary, and even to those forms
of production which we call luxuries, yet in any given human society there is a
certain kind and a certain amount of wealth without which human life cannot be
lived: as, for instance, in England to-day, certain forms of cooked and
elaborately prepared food, clothing, warmth, and habitation.

Therefore, to control the production of wealth is to control human life itself.
To refuse man the opportunity for the production of wealth is to refuse him the
opportunity for life; and, in general, the way in which the production of wealth
is by law permitted is the only way in which the citizens can legally
exist.

Wealth can only be produced by the application of human energy, mental and
physical, to the forces of nature around us, and to the material which those
forces inform.

This human energy so applicable to the material world and its forces we will
call Labour. As for that material and those natural forces, we will call them,
for the sake of shortness, by the narrow, but conventionally accepted, term
Land.

It would seem, therefore, that all problems connected with the production of
wealth, and all discussion thereupon, involve but two principal original
factors, to wit, Labour and Land, But it so happens that the conscious,
artificial, and intelligent action of man upon nature, corresponding to his
peculiar character compared with other created beings, introduces a third factor
of the utmost importance.

Man proceeds to create wealth by ingenious methods of varying and often
increasing complexity, and aids himself by the construction of implements. These
soon become in each new department of the production as truly necessary to that
production as labour and land. Further, any process of production takes a
certain time; during that time the producer must be fed, and clothed, and
housed, and the rest of it. There must therefore be an accumulation of wealth
created in the past, and reserved with the object of maintaining labour during
its effort to produce for the future.

Whether it be the making of an instrument or tool, or the setting aside of a
store of provisions, labour applied to land for either purpose is not producing
wealth for immediate consumption. It is setting aside and reserving somewhat,
and that somewhat is always necessary in varying proportions according to the
simplicity or complexity of the economic society to the production of
wealth.

To such wealth reserved and set aside for the purposes of future production, and
not for immediate consumption, whether it be in the form of instruments and
tools, or in the form of stores for the maintenance of labour during the process
of production, we give the name of Capital.

There are thus three factors in the production of all human wealth, which we may
conventionally term Land, Capital, and Labour.

When we talk of the Means of Production we signify land and capital combined.
Thus, when we say that a man is “dispossessed of the means of production,” or
cannot produce wealth save by the leave of another who “possesses the means of
production,” we mean that he is the master only of his labour and has no
control, in any useful amount, over either capital, or land, or both
combined.

A man politically free, that is, one who enjoys the right before the law to
exercise his energies when he pleases (or not at all if he does not so please),
but not possessed by legal right of control over any useful amount of the means
of production, we call proletarian, and any considerable class composed of such
men we call a proletariat.

Property is a term used for that arrangement in society whereby the control of
land and of wealth made from land, including therefore all the means of
production, is vested in some person or corporation. Thus we may say of a
building, including the land upon which it stands, that it is the “property” of
such and such a citizen, or family, or college, or of the State, meaning that
those who “own” such property are guaranteed by the laws in the right to use it
or withhold it from use. Private property signifies such wealth (including the
means of production) as may, by the arrangements of society, be in the control
of persons or corporations other than the political bodies of which these
persons or corporations are in another aspect members. What distinguishes
private property is not that the possessor thereof is less than the State, or is
only a part of the State (for were that so we should talk of municipal property
as private property), but rather that the owner may exercise his control over it
to his own advantage, and not as a trustee for society, nor in the hierarchy of
political institutions. Thus Mr Jones is a citizen of Manchester, but he does
not own his private property as a citizen of Manchester, he owns it as Mr Jones,
whereas, if the house next to his own be owned by the Manchester municipality,
they own it only because they are a political body standing for the whole
community of the town. Mr Jones might move to Glasgow and still own his property
in Manchester, but the municipality of Manchester can only own its property in
connection with the corporate political life of the town.

An ideal society in which the means of production should be in the hands of the
political officers of the community we call Collectivist, or more generally
Socialist.*

* Save in this special sense of “Collectivist,” the word “Socialist” has either
no clear meaning, or is used synonymously with other older and better-known
words.

A society in which private property in land and capital, that is, the ownership
and therefore the control of the means of production, is confined to some number
of free citizens not large enough to determine the social mass of the State,
while the rest have not such property and are therefore proletarian, we call
Capitalist; and the method by which wealth is produced in such a society can
only be the application of labour, the determining mass of which must
necessarily be proletarian, to land and capital, in such fashion that, of the
total wealth produced, the Proletariat which labours shall only receive a
portion.

The two marks, then, defining the Capitalist State are: (1) That the citizens
thereof are politically free: i.e. can use or withhold at will their possessions
or their labour, but are also (2) divided into capitalist and proletarian in
such proportions that the State as a whole is not characterised by the
institution of ownership among free citizens, but by the restriction of
ownership to a section markedly less than the whole, or even to a small
minority. Such a Capitalist State is essentially divided into two classes of
free citizens, the one capitalist or owning, the other propertyless or
proletarian.

My last definition concerns the Servile State itself, and since the idea is both
somewhat novel and also the subject of this book, I will not only establish but
expand its definition.

The definition of the Servile State is as follows:—

“That arrangement of society in which so considerable a number of the families
and individuals are constrained by positive law to labour for the advantage of
other families and individuals as to stamp the whole community with the mark of
such labour we call The Servile State.”

Note first certain negative limitations in the above which must be clearly
seized if we are not to lose clear thinking in a fog of metaphor and
rhetoric.

That society is not servile in which men are intelligently constrained to labour
by enthusiasm, by a religious tenet, or indirectly from fear of destitution, or
directly from love of gain, or from the common sense which teaches them that by
their labour they may increase their well-being.

A clear boundary exists between the servile and the non-servile condition of
labour, and the conditions upon either side of that boundary utterly differ one
from another, Where there is compulsion applicable by positive law to men of a
certain status, and such compulsion enforced in the last resort by the powers at
the disposal of the State, there is the institution of Slavery; and if that
institution be sufficiently expanded the whole State may be said to repose upon
a servile basis, and is a Servile State.

Where such formal, legal status is absent the conditions are not servile; and
the difference between servitude and freedom, appreciable in a thousand details
of actual life, is most glaring in this: that the free man can refuse his labour
and use that refusal as an instrument wherewith to bargain; while the slave has
no such instrument or power to bargain at all, but is dependent for his
well-being upon the custom of society, backed by the regulation of such of its
laws as may protect and guarantee the slave.

Next, let it be observed that the State is not servile because the mere
institution of slavery is to be discovered somewhere within its confines. The
State is only servile when so considerable a body of forced labour is affected
by the compulsion of positive law as to give a character to the whole
community.

Similarly, that State is not servile in which all citizens are liable to submit
their energies to the compulsion of positive law, and must labour at the
discretion of State officials. By loose metaphor and for rhetorical purposes men
who dislike Collectivism (for instance) or the discipline of a regiment will
talk of the “servile” conditions of such organisations. But for the purposes of
strict definition and clear thinking it is essential to remember that a servile
condition only exists by contrast with a free condition. The servile condition
is present in society only when there is also present the free citizen for whose
benefit the slave works under the compulsion of positive law.

Again, it should be noted that this word “servile” in no way connotes the worst,
nor even necessarily a bad, arrangement of society, This point is so clear that
it should hardly delay us; but a confusion between the rhetorical and the
precise use of the word servile I have discovered to embarrass public discussion
of the matter so much that I must once more emphasise what should be
self-evident.

The discussion as to whether the institution of slavery be a good or a bad one,
or be relatively better or worse than other alternative institutions, has
nothing whatever to do with the exact definition of that institution. Thus
Monarchy consists in throwing the responsibility for the direction of society
upon an individual. One can imagine some Roman of the first century praising the
new Imperial power, but through a muddle-headed tradition against “kings”
swearing that he would never tolerate a “monarchy.” Such a fellow would have
been a very futile critic of public affairs under Trajan, but no more futile
than a man who swears that nothing shall make him a “slave,” though well
prepared to accept laws that compel him to labour without his consent, under the
force of public law, and upon terms dictated by others.

Many would argue that a man so compelled to labour, guaranteed against
insecurity and against insufficiency of food, housing and clothing, promised
subsistence for his old age, and a similar set of advantages for his posterity,
would be a great deal better off than a free man lacking all these things. But
the argument does not affect the definition attaching to the word servile. A
devout Christian of blameless life drifting upon an ice-flow in the Arctic
night, without food or any prospect of succour, is not so comfortably
circumstanced as the Khedive of Egypt; but it would be folly in establishing the
definition of the words “Christian” and “Mahommedan” to bring this contrast into
account.

We must then, throughout this inquiry, keep strictly to the economic aspect of
the case. Only when that is established and when the modern tendency to the
re-establishment of slavery is clear, are we free to discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of the revolution through which we are passing.

It must further be grasped that the essential mark of the Servile Institution
does not depend upon the ownership of the slave by a particular master. That the
institution of slavery tends to that form under the various forces composing
human nature and human society is probable enough. That if or when slavery were
re-established in England a particular man would in time be found the slave not
of Capitalism in general but of, say, the Shell Oil Trust in particular, is a
very likely development; and we know that in societies where the institution was
of immemorial antiquity such direct possession of the slave by the free man or
corporation of free men had come to be the rule. But my point is that such a
mark is not essential to the character of slavery. As an initial phase in the
institution of slavery, or even as a permanent phase marking society for an
indefinite time, it is perfectly easy to conceive of a whole class rendered
servile by positive law, and compelled by such law to labour for the advantage
of another non-servile free class, without any direct act of possession
permitted to one man over the person of another.

The final contrast thus established between slave and free might be maintained
by the State guaranteeing to the un-free, security in their subsistence, to the
free, security in their property and profits, rent and interest. What would mark
the slave in such a society would be his belonging to that set or status which
was compelled by no matter what definition to labour, and was thus cut off from
the other set or status not compelled to labour, but free to labour or not as it
willed.

Again, the Servile State would certainly exist even though a man, being only
compelled to labour during a portion of his time, were free to bargain and even
to accumulate in his “free” time. The old lawyers used to distinguish between a
serf “in gross” and a serf “regardant.” A serf “in gross” was one who was a serf
at all times and places, and not in respect to a particular lord. A serf
“regardant” was a serf only in his bondage to serve a particular lord. He was
free as against other men. And one might perfectly well have slaves who were
only slaves “regardant” to a particular type of employment during particular
hours. But they would be slaves none the less, and if their hours were many and
their class numerous, the State which they supported would be a Servile
State.

Lastly, let it be remembered that the servile condition remains as truly an
institution of the State when it attaches permanently and irrevocably at any one
time to a particular set of human beings as when it attaches to a particular
class throughout their lives. Thus the laws of Paganism permitted the slave to
be enfranchised by his master: it further permitted children or prisoners to be
sold into slavery. The Servile Institution, though perpetually changing in the
elements of its composition, was still an unchanging factor in the State.
Similarly, though the State should only subject to slavery those who had less
than a certain income, while leaving men free by inheritance or otherwise to
pass out of, and by loss to pass into, the slave class, that slave class, though
fluctuating as to its composition, would still permanently exist.

Thus, if the modern industrial State shall make a law by which servile
conditions shall not attach to those capable of earning more than a certain sum
by their own labour, but shall attach to those who earn less than this sum; or
if the modern industrial State defines manual labour in a particular fashion,
renders it compulsory during a fixed time for those who undertake it, but leaves
them free to turn later to other occupations if they choose, undoubtedly such
distinctions, though they attach to conditions and not to individuals, establish
the Servile Institution.

Some considerable number must be manual workers by definition, and while they
were so defined would be slaves. Here again the composition of the Servile class
would fluctuate, but the class would be permanent and large enough to stamp all
society. I need not insist upon the practical effect: that such a class, once
established, tends to be fixed in the great majority of those which make it up,
and that the individuals entering or leaving it tend to become few compared to
the whole mass.

There is one last point to be considered in this definition.

It is this:—

Since, in the nature of things, a free society must enforce a contract (a free
society consisting in nothing else but the enforcement of free contracts), how
far can that be called a Servile condition which is the result of contract
nominally or really free? In other words, is not a contract to labour, however
freely entered into, servile of its nature when enforced by the State?

For instance, I have no food or clothing, nor do I possess the means of
production whereby I can produce any wealth in exchange for such. I am so
circumstanced that an owner of the Means of Production will not allow me access
to those Means unless I sign a contract to serve him for a week at a wage of
bare subsistence. Does the State in enforcing that contract make me for that
week a slave?

Obviously not. For the institution of Slavery presupposes a certain attitude of
mind in the free man and in the slave, a habit of living in either, and the
stamp of both those habits upon society. No such effects are produced by a
contract enforceable by the length of one week. The duration of human life is
such, and the prospect of posterity, that the fulfilling of such a contract in
no way wounds the senses of liberty and of choice.

What of a month, a year, ten years, a lifetime? Suppose an extreme case, and a
destitute man to sign a contract binding him and all his children who were
minors to work for a bare subsistence until his own death, or the attainment of
majority of the children, whichever event might happen latest; would the State
in forcing that contract be making the man a slave?

As undoubtedly as it would not be making him a slave in the first case, it would
be making him a slave in the second.

One can only say to ancient sophistical difficulties of this kind, that the
sense of men establishes for itself the true limits of any object, as of
freedom. What freedom is, or is not, in so far as mere measure of time is
concerned (though of course much else than time enters in), human habit
determines; but the enforcing of a contract of service certainly or probably
leaving a choice after its expiration is consonant with freedom. The enforcement
of a contract probably binding one’s whole life is not consonant with freedom.
One binding to service a man’s natural heirs is intolerable to freedom.

Consider another converse point. A man binds himself to work for life and his
children after him so far as the law may permit him to bind them in a particular
society, but that not for a bare subsistence, but for so large a wage that he
will be wealthy in a few years, and his posterity, when the contract is
completed, wealthier still. Does the State in forcing such a contract make the
fortunate employee a slave? No. For it is in the essence of slavery that
subsistence or little more than subsistence should be guaranteed to the slave.
Slavery exists in order that the Free should benefit by its existence, and
connotes a condition in which the men subjected to it may demand secure
existence, but little more.

If anyone were to draw an exact line, and to say that a life-contract
enforceable by law was slavery at so many shillings a week, but ceased to be
slavery after that margin, his effort would be folly. None the less, there is a
standard of subsistence in any one society, the guarantee of which (or little
more) under an obligation to labour by compulsion is slavery, while the
guarantee of very much more is not slavery.

This verbal jugglery might be continued. It is a type of verbal difficulty
apparent in every inquiry open to the professional disputant, but of no effect
upon the mind of the honest inquirer whose business is not dialectic but
truth.

It is always possible by establishing a cross-section in a set of definitions to
pose the unanswerable difficulty of degree, but that will never affect the
realities of discussion. We know, for instance, what is meant by torture when it
exists in a code of laws, and when it is forbidden. No imaginary difficulties of
degree between pulling a man’s hair and scalping him, between warming him and
burning him alive, will disturb a reformer whose business it is to expunge
torture from some penal code.

In the same way we know what is and what is not compulsory labour, what is and
what is not the Servile Condition. Its test is, I repeat, the withdrawal from a
man of his free choice to labour or not to labour, here or there, for such and
such an object; and the compelling of him by positive law to labour for the
advantage of others who do not fall under the same compulsion.

Where you have that, you have slavery: with all the manifold, spiritual, and
political results of that ancient institution.

Where you have slavery affecting a class of such considerable size as to mark
and determine the character of the State, there you have the Servile
State.

To sum up, then:—The Servile State is that in which we find so considerable a
body of families and individuals distinguished from free citizens by the mark of
compulsory labour as to stamp a general character upon society, and all the
chief characters, good or evil, attaching to the institution of slavery will be
found permeating such a State, whether the slaves be directly and personally
attached to their masters, only indirectly attached through the medium of the
State, or attached in a third manner through their subservience to corporations
or to particular industries. The slave so compelled to labour will be one
dispossessed of the means of production, and compelled by law to labour for the
advantage of all or any who are possessed thereof. And the distinguishing mark
of the slave proceeds from the special action upon him of a positive law which
first separates one body of men, the less-free, from another, the more free, in
the function of contract within the general body of the community.

Now, from a purely Servile conception of production and of the arrangement of
society we Europeans sprang. The Immemorial past of Europe is a Servile past.
During some centuries which the Church raised, permeated, and constructed,
Europe was gradually released or divorced from this immemorial and fundamental
conception of slavery; to that conception, to that institution, our Industrial
or Capitalist society is now upon its return. We are re-establishing the
slave.

Before proceeding to the proof of this, I shall, in the next few pages, digress
to sketch very briefly the process whereby the old Pagan slavery was transformed
into a free society some centuries ago. I shall then outline the further process
whereby the new non-servile society was wrecked at the Reformation in certain
areas of Europe, and particularly in England. There was gradually produced in
its stead the transitory phase of society (now nearing its end) called generally
Capitalism or the Capitalist State.

Such a digression, being purely historical, is not logically necessary to a
consideration of our subject, but it is of great value to the reader, because
the knowledge of how, in reality and in the concrete, things have moved better
enables us to understand the logical process whereby they tend towards a
particular goal in the future.

One could prove the tendency towards the Servile State in England to-day to a
man who knew nothing of the past of Europe; but that tendency will seem to him
far more reasonably probable, far more a matter of experience and less a matter
of mere deduction, when he knows what our society once was, and how it changed
into what we know to-day.




Section Two
Our Civilisation Was Originally Servile


In no matter what field of the European past we make our research, we find, from
two thousand years ago upwards, one fundamental institution whereupon the whole
of society reposes; that fundamental institution is Slavery.

There is here no distinction between the highly civilised City-State of the
Mediterranean, with its letters, its plastic art, and its code of laws, with all
that makes a civilisation—and this stretching back far beyond any surviving
record,—there is here no distinction between that civilised body and the
Northern and Western societies of the Celtic tribes, or of the little known
hordes that wandered in the Germanies. All indifferently reposed upon slavery.
It was a fundamental conception of society. It was everywhere present, nowhere
disputed.

There is a distinction (or would appear to be) between Europeans and Asiatics in
this matter. The religion and morals of the one so differed in their very origin
from those of the other that every social institution was touched by the
contrast—and Slavery among the rest.

But with that we need not concern ourselves. My point is that our European
ancestry, those men from whom we are descended and whose blood runs with little
admixture in our veins, took slavery for granted, made of it the economic pivot
upon which the production of wealth should turn, and never doubted but that it
was normal to all human society.

It is a matter of capital importance to seize this.

An arrangement of such a sort would not have endured without intermission (and
indeed without question) for many centuries, nor have been found emerging fully
grown from that vast space of unrecorded time during which barbarism and
civilisation flourished side by side in Europe,had there not been something in
it, good or evil, native to our blood.

There was no question in those ancient societies from which we spring of making
subject races into slaves by the might of conquering races. All that is the
guess-work of the universities. Not only is there no proof of it, rather all the
existing proof is the other way. The Greek had a Greek slave, the Latin a Latin
slave, the German a German slave, the Celt a Celtic slave. The theory that
“superior races” invaded a land, either drove out the original inhabitants or
reduced them to slavery, is one which has no argument either from our present
knowledge of man’s mind or from recorded evidence. Indeed, the most striking
feature of that Servile Basis upon which Paganism reposed was the human equality
recognised between master and slave. The master might kill the slave, but both
were of one race and each was human to the other.

This spiritual value was not, as a further pernicious piece of guess-work would
dream, a “growth” or a “progress.” The doctrine of human equality was inherent
in the very stuff of antiquity, as it is inherent in those societies which have
not lost tradition.

We may presume that the barbarian of the North would grasp the great truth with
less facility than the civilised man of the Mediterranean, because barbarism
everywhere shows a retrogression in intellectual power; but the proof that the
Servile Institution was a social arrangement rather than a distinction of type
is patent from the coincidence everywhere of Emancipation with Slavery. Pagan
Europe not only thought the existence of Slaves a natural necessity to society,
but equally thought that upon giving a Slave his freedom the enfranchised man
would naturally step, though perhaps after the interval of some lineage, into
the ranks of free society. Great poets and great artists, statesmen and soldiers
were little troubled by the memory of a servile ancestry.

On the other hand, there was a perpetual recruitment of the Servile Institution,
just as there was a perpetual emancipation from it, proceeding year after year;
and the natural or normal method of recruitment is most clearly apparent to us
in the simple and barbaric societies which the observation of contemporary
civilised Pagans enables us to judge.

It was poverty that made the slave.

Prisoners of war taken in set combat afforded one mode of recruitment, and there
was also the raiding of men by pirates in the outer lands and the selling of
them in the slave markets of the South. But at once the cause of the recruitment
and the permanent support of the institution of slavery was the indigence of the
man who sold himself into slavery, or was born into it; for it was a rule of
Pagan Slavery that the slave bred the slave, and that even if one of the parents
were free the offspring was a slave.

The society of antiquity, therefore, was normally divided (as must at last be
the society of any servile state) into clearly marked sections: there was upon
the one hand the citizen who had a voice in the conduct of the State, who would
often labour—but labour of his own free will—and who was normally possessed of
property; upon the other hand, there was a mass dispossessed of the means of
production and compelled by positive law to labour at command.

It is true that in the further developments of society the accumulation of
private savings by a slave was tolerated and that slaves so favoured did
sometimes purchase their freedom.

It is further true that in the confusion of the last generations of Paganism
there arose in some of the great cities a considerable class of men who, though
free, were dispossessed of the means of production. But these last never existed
in a sufficient proportion to stamp the whole State of society with a character
drawn from their proletarian circumstance. To the end the Pagan world remained a
world of free proprietors possessed, in various degrees, of the land and of the
capital whereby wealth may be produced, and applying to that land and capital
for the purpose of producing wealth, compulsory labour.

Certain features in that original Servile State from which we all spring should
be carefully noted by way of conclusion.

First, though all nowadays contrast slavery with freedom to the advantage of the
latter, yet men then accepted slavery freely as an alternative to
indigence.

Secondly (and this is most important for our judgment of the Servile Institution
as a whole, and of the chances of its return), in all those centuries we find no
organised effort, nor (what is still more significant) do we find any complaint
of conscience against the institution which condemned the bulk of human beings
to forced labour.

Slaves may be found in the literary exercises of the time bewailing their lot
and joking about it; some philosophers will complain that an ideal society
should contain no slaves; others will excuse the establishment of slavery upon
this plea or that, while granting that it offends the dignity of man. The
greater part will argue of the State that it is necessarily Servile. But no one,
slave or free, dreams of abolishing or even of changing the thing. You have no
martyrs for the case of “freedom” as against “slavery.” The so-called Servile
wars are the resistance on the part of escaped slaves to any attempt at
recapture, but they are not accompanied by an accepted affirmation that
servitude is an intolerable thing; nor is that note struck at all from the
unknown beginnings to the Catholic endings of the Pagan world. Slavery is
irksome, undignified, woeful; but it is, to them, of the nature of
things.

You may say, to be brief, that this arrangement of society was the very air
which Pagan Antiquity breathed.

Its great works, its leisure and its domestic life, its humour, its reserves of
power, all depend upon the fact that its society was that of the Servile
State.

Men were happy in that arrangement, or, at least, as happy as men ever
are.

The attempt to escape by a personal effort, whether of thrift, of adventure, or
of flattery to a master, from the Servile condition had never even so much of
driving power behind it as the attempt many show to-day to escape from the rank
of wage-earners to those of employers. Servitude did not seem a hell into which
a man would rather die than sink, or out of which at any sacrifice whatsoever a
man would raise himself. It was a condition accepted by those who suffered it as
much as by those who enjoyed it, and a perfectly necessary part of all that men
did and thought.

You find no barbarian from some free place astonished at the institution of
Slavery; you find no Slave pointing to a society in which Slavery was unknown as
towards a happier land. To our ancestors not only for those few centuries during
which we have record of their actions, but apparently during an illimitable
past, the division of society into those who must work under compulsion and
those who would benefit by their labour was the very plan of the State apart
from which they could hardly think of society as existing at all.

Let all this be clearly grasped. It is fundamental to an understanding of the
problem before us. Slavery is no novel experience in the history of Europe; nor
is one suffering an odd dream when one talks of Slavery as acceptable to
European men. Slavery was of the very stuff of Europe for thousands upon
thousands of years, until Europe engaged upon that considerable moral experiment
called The Faith, which many believe to be now accomplished and discarded, and
in the failure of which it would seem that the old and primary institution of
Slavery must return.

For there came upon us Europeans after all those centuries, and centuries of a
settled social order which was erected upon Slavery as upon a sure foundation,
the experiment called the Christian Church.

Among the by-products of this experiment, very slowly emerging from the old
Pagan world, and not long completed before Christendom itself suffered a
shipwreck, was the exceedingly gradual transformation of the Servile State into
something other: a society of owners. And how that something other did proceed
from the Pagan Servile State I will next explain.




Section Three
How the Servile Institution Was for a Time Dissolved


The process by which slavery disappeared among Christian men, though very
lengthy in its development (it covered close upon a thousand years), and though
exceedingly complicated in its detail, may be easily and briefly grasped in its
main lines.

Let it first be clearly understood that the vast revolution through which the
European mind passed bet ween the first and the fourth centuries (that
revolution which is often termed the Conversion of the World to Christianity,
but which should for purposes of historical accuracy be called the Growth of the
Church) included no attack upon the Servile Institution.

No dogma of the Church pronounced Slavery to be immoral, or the sale and
purchase of men to be a sin, or the imposition of compulsory labour upon a
Christian to be a contravention of any human right.

The emancipation of Slaves was indeed regarded as a good work by the Faithful:
but so was it regarded by the Pagan. It was, on the face of it, a service
rendered to one’s fellowmen. The sale of Christians to Pagan masters was
abhorrent to the later empire of the Barbarian Invasions, not because slavery in
itself was condemned, but because it was a sort of treason to civilisation to
force men away from Civilisation to Barbarism. In general you will discover no
pronouncement against slavery as an institution, nor any moral definition
attacking it, throughout all those early Christian centuries during which it
none the less effectively disappears.

The form of its disappearance is well worth noting. It begins with the
establishment as the fundamental unit of production in Western Europe of those
great landed estates, commonly lying in the hands of a single proprietor, and
generally known as Villӕ.

There were, of course, many other forms of human agglomeration: small peasant
farms owned in absolute proprietorship by their petty masters; groups of free
men associated in what was called a Vicus; manufactories in which groups of
slaves were industrially organised to the profit of their master; and, governing
the regions around them, the scheme of Roman towns.

But of all these the Villa the dominating type; and as society passed from the
high civilisation of the first four centuries into the simplicity of the Dark
Ages, the Villa, the unit of agricultural production, became more and more the
model of all society.

Now the Villa began as a considerable extent of land, containing, like a modern
English estate, pasture, arable, water, wood and heath, or waste land. It was
owned by a dominus or lord in absolute proprietorship, to sell, or leave by
will, to do with it whatsoever he chose. It was cultivated for him by Slaves to
whom he owed nothing in return, and whom it was simply his interest to keep
alive and to continue breeding in order that they might perpetuate his
wealth.

I concentrate particularly upon these Slaves, the great majority of the human
beings inhabiting the land, because, although there arose in the Dark Ages, when
the Roman Empire was passing into the society of the Middle Ages, other social
elements within the Villæ—the Freed men who owed the lord a modified service,
and even occasionally independent citizens present through a contract terminable
and freely entered into yet it is the Slave who is the mark of all that
society.

At its origin, then, the Roman Villa was a piece of absolute property, the
production of wealth upon which was due to the application of slave labour to
the natural resources of the place; and that slave labour was as much the
property of the lord as was the land itself.

The first modification which this arrangement showed in the new society which
accompanied the growth and establishment of the Church in the Roman world, was a
sort of customary rule which modified the old arbitrary position of the
Slave.

The Slave was still a Slave, but it was both more convenient in the decay of
communications and public power, and more consonant with the social spirit of
the time to make sure of that Slave’s produce by asking him for no more than
certain customary dues. The Slave and his descendants became more or less rooted
to one spot. Some were still bought and sold, but in decreasing numbers. As the
generations passed a larger and a larger proportion lived where and as their
fathers had lived, and the produce which they raised was fixed more and more at
a certain amount, which the lord was content to receive and ask no more. The
arrangement was made workable by leaving to the Slave all the remaining produce
of his own labour. There was a sort of implied bargain here, in the absence of
public powers and in the decline of the old highly centralised and vigorous
system which could always guarantee to the master the full product of the
Slave’s effort. The bargain implied was, that if the Slave Community of the
Villa would produce for the benefit of its Lord not less than a certain
customary amount of goods from the soil of the Villa, the Lord could count on
their always exercising that effort by leaving to them all the surplus, which
they could increase, if they willed, indefinitely.

By the ninth century, when this process had been gradually at work for a matter
of some three hundred years, one fixed form of productive unit began to be
apparent throughout Western Christendom.

The old absolutely owned estate had come to be divided into three portions. One
of these was pasture and arable land, reserved privately to the lord, and called
domain: that is, lord’s land. Another was in the occupation, and already almost
in the possession (practically, though not legally),of those who had once been
Slaves. A third was common land over which both the Lord and the Slave exercised
each their various rights, which rights were minutely remembered and held sacred
by custom. For instance, in a certain village, if there was beech pasture for
three hundred swine, the lord might put in but fifty: two hundred and fifty were
the rights of the “village.”

Upon the first of these portions, Domain, wealth was produced by the obedience
of the Slave for certain fixed hours of labour. He must come so many days a
week, or upon such and such occasions (all fixed and customary), to till the
land of the Domain for his Lord, and all the produce of this must be handed over
to the Lord though, of course, a daily wage in kind was allowed, for the
labourer must live.

Upon the second portion, “Land in Villenage,” which was nearly always the most
of the arable and pasture land of the Villæ, the Slaves worked by rules and
customs which they gradually came to elaborate for themselves. They worked under
an officer of their own, sometimes nominated, sometimes elected: nearly always,
in practice, a man suitable to them and more or less of their choice; though
this co-operative work upon the old Slave-ground was controlled by the general
customs of the village, common to lord and slave alike, and the principal
officer over both kinds of land was the Lord’s Steward.

Of the wealth so produced by the Slaves, a certain fixed portion (estimated
originally in kind) was payable to the Lord’s Bailiff, and became the property
of the Lord.

Finally, on the third division of the land, the “Waste,” the “Wood,” the
“Heath,” and certain common pastures, wealth was produced as elsewhere by the
labour of those who had once been the Slaves, but divided in customary
proportions between them and their master. Thus, such and such a water meadow
would have grazing for so many oxen; the number was rigidly defined, and of that
number so many would be the Lord’s and so many the Villagers’.

During the eighth, ninth and tenth centuries this system crystallised and became
so natural in men’s eyes that the original servile character of the working folk
upon the Villa was forgotten.

The documents of the time are rare. These three centuries are the crucible of
Europe, and record is drowned and burnt in them. Our study of their social
conditions, especially in the latter part, are matter rather of inference than
of direct evidence. But the sale and purchase of men, already exceptional at the
beginning of this period, is almost unknown before the end of it. Apart from
domestic slaves within the household, slavery in the old sense which Pagan
antiquity gave that institution had been transformed out of all knowledge, and
when, with the eleventh century, the true Middle Ages begin to spring from the
soil of the Dark Ages, and a new civilisation to arise, though the old word
servus (the Latin for a slave) is still used for the man who works the soil, his
status in the now increasing number of documents which we can consult is wholly
changed; we can certainly no longer translate the word by the English word
slave; we are compelled to translate it by a new word with very different
connotations: the word serf.

The Serf of the early Middle Ages, of the eleventh and early twelfth centuries,
of the Crusades and the Norman Conquest, is already nearly a peasant. He is
indeed bound in legal theory to the soil upon which he was born. In social
practice, all that is required of him is that his family should till its quota
of servile land, and that the dues to the lord shall not fail from absence of
labour. That duty fulfilled, it is easy and common for members of the serf-class
to enter the professions and the Church, or to go wild; to become men
practically free in the growing industries of the towns. With every passing
generation the ancient servile conception of the labourer’s status grows more
and more dim, and the Courts and the practice of society treat him more and more
as a man strictly bound to certain dues and to certain periodical labour within
his industrial unit, but in all other respects free.

As the civilisation of the Middle Ages develops, as wealth increases and the
arts progressively flourish, this character of freedom becomes more marked. In
spite of attempts in time of scarcity (as after a plague) to insist upon the old
rights to compulsory labour, the habit of commuting these rights for
money-payments and dues has grown too strong to be resisted.

If at the end of the fourteenth century, let us say, or at the beginning of the
fifteenth, you had visited some Squire upon his estate in France or in England,
he would have told you of the whole of it, “These are my lands.” But the peasant
(as he now was) would have said also of his holding, “This is my land.” He could
not be evicted from it. The dues which he was customarily bound to pay were but
a fraction of its total produce. He could not always sell it, but it was always
inheritable from father to son; and, in general, at the close of this long
process of a thousand years the Slave had become a free man for all the ordinary
purposes of society. He bought and sold. He saved as he willed, he invested, he
built, he drained at his discretion, and if he improved the land it was to his
own profit.

Meanwhile, side by side with this emancipation of mankind in the direct line of
descent from the old chattel slaves of the Roman villa went, in the Middle Ages,
a crowd of institutions which all similarly made for a distribution of property,
and for the destruction of even the fossil remnants of a then forgotten Servile
State. Thus industry of every kind in the towns, in transport, in crafts, and in
commerce, was organised in the form of Guilds. And a Guild was a society partly
co-operative, but in the main composed of private owners of capital whose
corporation was self-governing, and was designed to check competition between
its members: to prevent the growth of one at the expense of the other. Above
all, most jealously did the Guild safeguard the division of property, so that
there should be formed within its ranks no proletariat upon the one side, and no
monopolising capitalist upon the other.

There was a period of apprenticeship at a man’s entry into a Guild, during which
he worked for a master; but in time he became a master in his turn. The
existence of such corporations as the normal units of industrial production, of
commercial effort, and of the means of transport, is proof enough of what the
social spirit was which had also enfranchised the labourer upon the land. And
while such institutions flourished side by side with the no longer servile
village communities, freehold or absolute possession of the soil, as
distinguished from the tenure of the serf under the lord, also increased.

These three forms under which labour was exercised the serf, secure in his
position, and burdened only with regular dues, which were but a fraction of his
produce; the freeholder, a man independent save for money dues, which were more
of a tax than a rent; the Guild, in which well-divided capital worked
co-operatively for craft production, for transport and for commerce—all three
between them were making for a society which should be based upon the principle
of property. All, or most,—the normal family—should own. And on ownership the
freedom of the State should repose.

The State, as the minds of men envisaged it at the close of this process, was an
agglomeration of families of varying wealth, but by far the greater number
owners of the means of production. It was an agglomeration in which the
stability of this distributive system (as I have called it) was guaranteed by
the existence of co-operative bodies, binding men of the same craft or of the
same village together; guaranteeing the small proprietor against loss of his
economic independence, while at the same time it guaranteed society against the
growth of a proletariat. If liberty of purchase and of sale, of mortgage and of
inheritance was restricted, it was restricted with the social object of
preventing the growth of an economic oligarchy which could exploit the rest of
the community. The restraints upon liberty were restraints designed for the
preservation of liberty; and every action of Mediæval Society, from the flower
of the Middle Ages to the approach of their catastrophe, was directed towards
the establishment of a State in which men should be economically free through
the possession of capital and of land.

Save here and there in legal formulæ, or in rare patches isolated and eccentric,
the Servile Institution had totally disappeared; nor must it be imagined that
anything in the nature of Collectivism had replaced it. There was common land,
but it was common land jealously guarded by men who were also personal
proprietors of other land. Common property in the village was but one of the
forms of property, and was used rather as the fly-wheel to preserve the
regularity of the co-operative machine than as a type of holding in any way
peculiarly sacred. The Guilds had property in common, but that property was the
property necessary to their co-operative life, their Halls, their Funds for
Relief, their Religious Endowments. As for the instruments of their trades,
those instruments were owned by the individual members, not by the guild, save
where they were of so expensive a kind as to necessitate a corporate
control.

Such was the transformation which had come over European society in the course
of ten Christian centuries. Slavery had gone, and in its place had come that
establishment of free possession which seemed so normal to men, and so consonant
to a happy human life. No particular name was then found for it. To-day, and now
that it has disappeared, we must construct an awkward one, and say that the
Middle Ages had instinctively conceived and brought into existence the
Distributive State.

That excellent consummation of human society passed, as we know, and was in
certain Provinces of Europe, but more particularly in Britain, destroyed.

For a society in which the determinant mass of families were owners of capital
and of land; for one in which production was regulated by self-governing
corporations of small owners; and for one in which the misery and insecurity of
a proletariat was unknown, there came to be substituted the dreadful moral
anarchy against which all moral effort is now turned, and which goes by the name
of Capitalism.

How did such a catastrophe come about? Why was it permitted, and upon what
historical process did the evil batten? What turned an England economically free
into the England which we know to-day, of which at least one-third is indigent,
of which nineteen-twentieths are dispossessed of capital and of land, and of
which the whole industry and national life is controlled upon its economic side
by a few chance directors of millions, a few masters of unsocial and
irresponsible monopolies?

The answer most usually given to this fundamental question in our history, and
the one most readily accepted, is that this misfortune came about through a
material process known as the Industrial Revolution. The use of expensive
machinery, the concentration of industry and of its implements are imagined to
have enslaved, in some blind way, apart from the human will, the action of
English mankind.

The explanation is wholly false. No such material cause determined the
degradation from which we suffer.

It was the deliberate action of men, evil will in a few and apathy of will among
the many, which produced a catastrophe as human in its causes and inception as
in its vile effect.

Capitalism was not the growth of the industrial movement, nor of chance material
discoveries. A little acquaintance with history and a little straightforwardness
in the teaching of it would be enough to prove that.

The Industrial System was a growth proceeding from Capitalism, not its cause.
Capitalism was here in England before the Industrial System came into
being;—before the use of coal and of the new expensive machinery, and of the
concentration of the implements of production in the great towns. Had Capitalism
not been present before the Industrial Revolution, that revolution might have
proved as beneficent to Englishmen as it has proved maleficent. But
Capitalism—that is, the ownership by a few of the springs of life—was present
long before the great discoveries came. It warped the effect of these
discoveries and new inventions, and it turned them from a good into an evil
thing. It was not machinery that lost us our freedom; it was the loss of a free
mind.




Section Four
How the Distributive State Failed


With the close of the middle ages the societies of Western Christendom and
England among the rest were economically free.

Property was an institution native to the State and enjoyed by the great mass of
its citizens. Co-operative institutions, voluntary regulations of labour,
restricted the completely independent use of property by its owners only in
order to keep that institution intact and to prevent the absorption of small
property by great.

This excellent state of affairs which we had reached after many centuries of
Christian development, and in which the old institution of slavery had been
finally eliminated from Christendom, did not everywhere survive. In England in
particular it was ruined. The seeds of the disaster were sown in the sixteenth
century. Its first apparent effects came to light in the seventeenth. During the
eighteenth century England came to be finally, though insecurely, established
upon a proletarian basis, that is, it had already become a society of rich men
possessed of the means of production on the one hand, and a majority
dispossessed of those means upon the other. With the nineteenth century the evil
plant had come to its maturity, and England had become before the close of that
period a purely Capitalist State, the type and model of Capitalism for the whole
world: with the means of production tightly held by a very small group of
citizens, and the whole determining mass of the nation dispossessed of capital
and land, and dispossessed, therefore, in all cases of security, and in many of
sufficiency as well. The mass of Englishmen, still possessed of political,
lacked more and more the elements of economic, freedom, and were in a worse
posture than free citizens have ever found themselves before in the history of
Europe.

By what steps did so enormous a catastrophe fall upon us?

The first step in the process consisted in the mishandling of a great economic
revolution which marked the sixteenth century. The lands and the accumulated
wealth of the monasteries were taken out of, the hands of their old possessors
with the intention of vesting them in the Crown—but they passed, as a fact, not
into the hands of the Crown, but into the hands of an already wealthy section of
the community who, after the change was complete, became in the succeeding
hundred years the governing power of England.

This is what happened:—

The England of the early sixteenth century, the England over which Henry VIII
inherited his powerful Crown in youth, though it was an England in which the
great mass of men owned the land they tilled and the houses in which they dwelt,
and the implements with which they worked, was yet an England in which these
goods, though widely distributed, were distributed unequally.

Then, as now, the soil and its fixtures were the basis of all wealth, but the
proportion between the value of the soil and its fixtures and the value of other
means of production (implements, stores of clothing and of subsistence, etc.)
was different from what it is now. The land and the fixtures upon it formed a
very much larger fraction of the totality of the means of production than they
do to-day. They represent to-day not one-half the total means of production of
this country, and though they are the necessary foundation for all wealth
production, yet our great machines, our stores of food and clothing, our coal
and oil, our ships and the rest of it, come to more than the true value of the
land and of the fixtures upon the land: they come to more than the arable soil
and the pasture, the constructional value of the houses, wharves and docks,and
so forth. In the early sixteenth century the land and the fixtures upon it came,
upon the contrary, to very much more than all other forms of wealth
combined.

Now this form of wealth was here, more than in any other Western European
country, already in the hands of a wealthy land-owning class at the end of the
Middle Ages.

It is impossible to give exact statistics, because none were gathered, and we
can only make general statements based upon inference and research. But, roughly
speaking, we may say that of the total value of the land and its fixtures,
probably rather more than a quarter, though less than a third, was in the hands
of this wealthy class.

The England of that day was mainly agricultural, and consisted of more than
four, but less than six million people, and in every agricultural community you
would have the Lord, as he was legally called (the squire, as he was already
conversationally termed), in possession of more demesne land than in any other
country. On the average you found him, I say, owning in this absolute fashion
rather more than a quarter, perhaps a third of the land of the village: in the
towns the distribution was more even. Sometimes it was a private individual who
was in this position, sometimes a corporation, but in every village you would
have found this demesne land absolutely owned by the political head of the
village, occupying a considerable proportion of its acreage. The rest, though
distributed as property among the less fortunate of the population, and carrying
with it houses and implements from which they could not be dispossessed, paid
certain dues to the Lord, and, what was more, the Lord exercised local justice.
This class of wealthy landowners had been also for now one hundred years the
Justices upon whom local administration depended.

There was no reason why this state of affairs should not gradually have led to
the rise of the Peasant and the decay of the Lord. That is what happened in
France, and it might perfectly well have happened here. A peasantry eager to
purchase might have gradually extended their holdings at the expense of the
demesne land, and to the distribution of property, which was already fairly
complete, there might have been added another excellent element, namely, the
more equal possession of that property. But any such process of gradual buying
by the small man from the great, such as would seem natural to the temper of us
European people, and such as has since taken place nearly everywhere in
countries which were left free to act upon their popular instincts, was
interrupted in this country by an artificial revolution of the most violent
kind. This artificial revolution consisted in the seizing of the monastic lands
by the Crown.

It is important to grasp clearly the nature of this operation, for the whole
economic future of England was to flow from it.

Of the demesne lands, and the power of local administration which they carried
with them (a very important feature, as we shall see later), rather more than a
quarter were in the hands of the Church; the Church was therefore the “Lord” of
something over 25 per cent. say 28 per cent. or perhaps nearly 30 per cent. of
English agricultural communities, and the overseers of a like proportion of all
English agricultural produce. The Church was further the absolute owner in
practice of something like 30 per cent. of the demesne land in the villages, and
the receiver of something like 30 per cent. of the customary dues, etc., paid by
the smaller owners to the greater. All this economic power lay until 1535 in the
hands of Cathedral Chapters, communities of monks and nuns, educational
establishments conducted by the clergy, and so forth.

When the Monastic lands were confiscated by Henry VIII, not the whole of this
vast economic influence was suddenly extinguished. The secular clergy remained
endowed, and most of the educational establishments, though looted, retained
some revenue; but though the whole 30 per cent. did not suffer confiscation,
something well over 20 per cent. did, and the revolution effected by this vast
operation was by far the most complete, the most sudden, and the most momentous
of any that has taken place in the economic history of any European
people.

It was at first intended to retain this great mass of the means of production in
the hands of the Crown: that must be clearly remembered by any student of the
fortunes of England, and by all who marvel at the contrast between the old
England and the new.

Had that intention been firmly maintained, the English State and its government
would have been the most powerful in Europe.

The Executive (which in those days meant the King) would have had a greater
opportunity for crushing the resistance of the wealthy, for backing its
political power with economic power, and for ordering the social life of its
subjects than any other executive in Christendom.

Had Henry VIII and his successors kept the land thus confiscated, the power of
the French Monarchy, at which we are astonished, would have been nothing to the
power of the English.

The King of England would have had in his own hands an instrument of control of
the most absolute sort. He would presumably have used it, as a strong central
government always does, for the weakening of the wealthier classes, and to the
indirect advantage of the mass of the people. At any rate, it would have been a
very different England indeed from the England we know, if the King had held
fast to his own after the dissolution of the monasteries.

Now it is precisely here that the capital point in this great revolution
appears. The King failed to keep the lands he had seized. That class of large
landowners which already existed and controlled, as I have said, anything from a
quarter to a third of the agricultural values of England, were too strong for
the monarchy. They insisted upon land being granted to themselves, sometimes
freely, sometimes for ridiculously small sums, and they were strong enough in
Parliament, and through the local administrative power they had, to see that
their demands were satisfied. Nothing that the Crown let go ever went back to
the Crown, and year after year more and more of what had once been the monastic
land became the absolute possession of the large landowners.

Observe the effect of this. All over England men who already held in virtually
absolute property from one-quarter to one-third of the soil and the ploughs and
the barns of a village, became possessed in a very few years of a further great
section of the means of production, which turned the scale wholly in their
favour. They added to that third a new and extra fifth. They became at a blow
the owners of half the land! In many centres of capital importance they had come
to own more than half the land. They were in many districts not only the
unquestioned superiors, but the economic masters of the rest of the community.
They could buy to the greatest advantage. They were strictly competitive,
getting every shilling of due and of rent where the old clerical landlords had
been customary—leaving much to the tenant. They began to fill the universities,
the judiciary. The Crown less and less decided between great and small. More and
more the great could decide in their own favour. They soon possessed by these
operations the bulk of the means of production, and they immediately began the
process of eating up the small independent men and gradually forming those great
estates which, in the course of a few generations, became identical with the
village itself. All over England you may notice that the great squires’ houses
date from this revolution or after it. The manorial house, the house of the
local great man as it was in the Middle Ages, survives here and there to show of
what immense effect this revolution was. The low-timbered place with its
steadings and outbuildings, only a larger farmhouse among the other farmhouses,
is turned after the Reformation and thenceforward into a palace. Save where
great castles (which were only held of the Crown and not owned) made an
exception, the pre-Reformation gentry lived as men richer than, but not the
masters of, other farmers around them. After the Reformation there began to
arise all over England those great “country houses” which rapidly became the
typical centres of English agricultural life.

The process was in full swing before Henry died. Unfortunately for England, he
left as his heir a sickly child, during the six years of whose reign, from 1547
to 1553, the loot went on at an appalling rate. When he died and Mary came to
the throne it was nearly completed. A mass of new families had arisen, wealthy
out of all proportion to anything which the older England had known, and bound
by a common interest to the older families which had joined in the grab. Every
single man who sat in Parliament for a country required his price for voting the
dissolution of the monasteries; every single man received it. A list of the
members of the Dissolution Parliament is enough to prove this, and, apart from
their power in Parliament, this class had a hundred other ways of insisting on
their will. The Howards (already of some lineage), the Cavendishes, the Cecils,
the Russels, and fifty other new families thus rose upon the ruins of religion;
and the process went steadily on until, about one hundred years after its
inception, the whole face of England was changed.

In the place of a powerful Crown disposing of revenues far greater than that of
any subject, you had a Crown at its wit’s end for money, and dominated by
subjects some of whom were its equals in wealth, and who could, especially
through the action of Parliament (which they now controlled), do much what they
willed with Government.

In other words, by the first third of the seventeenth century, by 1630—40, the
economic revolution was finally accomplished, and the new economic reality
thrusting itself upon the old traditions of England was a powerful oligarchy of
large owners overshadowing an impoverished and dwindled monarchy.

Other causes had contributed to this deplorable result. The change in the value
of money had hit the Crown very hard;* the peculiar history of the Tudor family,
their violent passions, their lack of resolution and of any continuous policy,
to some extent the character of Charles I himself, and many another subsidiary
cause may be quoted. But the great main fact upon which the whole thing is
dependent is the fact that the Monastic Lands, at least a fifth of the wealth of
the country, had been transferred to the great landowners, and that this
transference had tipped the scale over entirely in their favour as against the
peasantry.

*The purchasing power of money fell during this century to about a third of its
original standard. £3 (say) would purchase under Charles I the necessities which
£1 would have purchased under Henry VIII. Nearly all the receipts of the Crown
were customary. Most of its expenses were competitive. It continued to get but
£1 where it was gradually compelled to pay out £3.

The diminished and impoverished Crown could no longer stand. It fought against
the new wealth, the struggle of the Civil Wars; it was utterly defeated; and
when a final settlement was arrived at in 1660, you have all the realities of
power in the hands of a small powerful class of wealthy men, the King still
surrounded by the forms and traditions of his old power, but in practice a
salaried puppet. And in that economic world which underlies all political
appearances, the great dominating note was that a few wealthy families had got
hold of the bulk of the means of production in England, while the same families
exercised all local administrative power and were moreover the Judges, the
Higher Education, the Church, and the generals. They quite overshadowed what was
left of central government in this country.

Take, as a starting-point for what followed, the date 1700. By that time more
than half of the English were dispossessed of capital and of land. Not one man
in two,even if you reckon the very small owners, inhabited a house of which he
was the secure possessor, or tilled land from which he could not be turned
off.

Such a proportion may seem to us to-day a wonderfully free arrangement, and
certainly if nearly one-half of our population were possessed of the means of
production, we should be in a very different situation from that in which we
find ourselves. But the point to seize is that, though the bad business was very
far from completion in or about the year 1700, yet by that date England had
already become Capitalist. She had already permitted a vast section of her
population to become proletarian, and it is this and not the so-called
“Industrial Revolution,” a later thing, which accounts for the terrible social
condition in which we find ourselves to-day.

How true this is what I still have to say in this section will prove.

In an England thus already cursed with a very large proletariat class, and in an
England already directed by a dominating Capitalist class, possessing the means
of production, there came a great industrial development.

Had that industrial development come upon a people economically free, it would
have taken a co-operative form. Coming as it did upon a people which had already
largely lost its economic freedom, it took at its very origin a Capitalist form,
and this form it has retained,expanded,and perfected throughout two hundred
years.

It was in England that the Industrial System arose. It was in England that all
its traditions and habits were formed; and because the England in which it arose
was already a Capitalist England, modern Industrialism, wherever you see it at
work to-day, having spread from England, has proceeded upon the Capitalist
model.

It was in 1705 that the first practical steam-engine, Newcomen’s, was set to
work. The life of a man elapsed before this invention was made, by Watt’s
introduction of the condenser, into the great instrument of production which has
transformed our industry—but in those sixty years all the origins of the
Industrial System are to be discovered. It was just before Watt’s patent that
Hargreaves’ spinning-jenny appeared. Thirty years earlier, Abraham Darby of
Colebrook Dale, at the end of a long series of experiments which had covered
more than a century, smelted iron-ore successfully with coke. Not twenty years
later, King introduced the flying shuttle, the first great improvement in the
hand-loom; and in general the period covered by such a life as that of Dr
Johnson, born just after Newcomen’s engine was first set working, and dying
seventy-four years afterwards, when the Industrial System was in full blast,
covers that great transformation of England. A man who, as a child, could
remember the last years of Queen Anne, and who lived to the eve of the French
Revolution, saw passing before his eyes the change which transformed English
society and has led it to the expansion and peril in which we see it
to-day.

What was the characteristic mark of that half-century and more? Why did the new
inventions give us the form of society now known and hated under the name of
Industrial? Why did the vast increase in the powers of production, in population
and in accumulation of wealth, turn the mass of Englishmen into a
poverty-stricken proletariat, cut off the rich from the rest of the nation, and
develop to the full all the evils which we associate with the Capitalist
State?

To that question an answer almost as universal as it is unintelligent has been
given. That answer is not only unintelligent but false, and it will be my
business here to show how false it is. The answer so provided in innumerable
textbooks, and taken almost as commonplace in our universities, is that the new
methods of production—the new machinery, the new implements—fatally and of
themselves developed a Capitalist State in which a few should own the means of
production and the mass should be proletariat. The new instruments, it is
pointed out, were on so vastly greater a scale than the old, and were so much
more expensive, that the small man could not afford them; while the rich man,
who could afford them, ate up by his competition, and reduced from the position
of a small owner to that of a wage-earner, his insufficiently equipped
competitor who still attempted to struggle on with the older and cheaper tools.
To this (we are told) the advantages of concentration were added in favour of
the large owner against the small. Not only were the new instruments expensive
almost in proportion to their efficiency, but, especially after the introduction
of steam, they were efficient in proportion to their concentration in few places
and under the direction of a few men. Under the effect of such false arguments
as these we have been taught to believe that the horrors of the Industrial
System were a blind and necessary product of material and impersonal forces, and
that wherever the steam engine, the power loom, the blast furnace and the rest
were introduced, there fatally would soon appear a little group of owners
exploiting a vast majority of the dispossessed.

It is astonishing that a statement so unhistorical should have gained so general
a credence. Indeed, were the main truths of English history taught in our
schools and universities to-day, were educated men familiar with the determining
and major facts of the national past, such follies could never have taken root.
The vast growth of the proletariat, the concentration of ownership into the
hands of a few owners, and the exploitation by those owners of the mass of the
community, had no fatal or necessary connection with the discovery of new and
perpetually improving methods of production. The evil proceeded indirect
historical sequence, proceeded patently and demonstrably, from the fact that
England, the seed-plot of the Industrial System, was already captured by a
wealthy oligarchy before the series of great discoveries began.

Consider in what way the Industrial System developed upon Capitalist lines. Why
were a few rich men put with such ease into possession of the new methods? Why
was it normal and natural in their eyes and in that of contemporary society that
those who produced the new wealth with the new machinery should be proletarian
and dispossessed? Simply because the England upon which the new discoveries had
come was already an England owned as to its soil and accumulations of wealth by
a small minority: it was already an England in which perhaps half of the whole
population was proletarian, and a medium for exploitation ready to
hand.

When any one of the new industries was launched it had to be capitalised; that
is, accumulated wealth from some source or other had to be found which would
support labour in the process of production until that process should be
complete. Someone must find the corn and the meat and the housing and the
clothing by which should be supported, between the extraction of the raw
material and the moment when the consumption of the finished article could
begin, the human agents which dealt with that raw material and turned it into
the finished product. Had property been well distributed, protected by
co-operative guilds fenced round and supported by custom and by the autonomy of
great artisan corporations, those accumulations of wealth, necessary for the
launching of each new method of production and for each new perfection of it,
would have been discovered in the mass of small owners. Their corporations,
their little parcels of wealth combined would have furnished the capitalisation
required for the new processes,and men already owners would, as one invention
succeeded another, have increased the total wealth of the community without
disturbing the balance of distribution. There is no conceivable link in reason
or in experience which binds the capitalisation of a new process with the idea
of a few employing owners and a mass of employed non-owners working at a wage.
Such great discoveries coming in a society like that of the thirteenth century
would have blest and enriched mankind. Coming upon the diseased moral conditions
of the eighteenth century in this country, they proved a curse.

To whom could the new industry turn for capitalisation? The small owner had
already largely disappeared. The corporate life and mutual obligations which had
supported him and confirmed him in his property had been broken to pieces by no
“economic development,” but by the deliberate action of the rich. He was
ignorant because his schools had been taken from him and the universities closed
to him. He was the more ignorant because the common life which once nourished
his social sense and the co-operative arrangements which had once been his
defence had disappeared. When you sought an accumulation of corn, of clothing,
of housing, of fuel as the indispensable preliminary to the launching of your
new industry; when you looked round for someone who could find the accumulated
wealth necessary for these considerable experiments, you had to turn to the
class which had already monopolised the bulk of the means of production in
England. The rich men alone could furnish you with those supplies.

Nor was this all. The supplies once found and the adventure “capitalised,” that
form of human energy which lay best to hand, which was indefinitely exploitable,
weak, ignorant, and desperately necessitous, ready to produce for you upon
almost any terms, and glad enough if you would only keep it alive, was the
existing proletariat which the new plutocracy had created when, in cornering the
wealth of the country after the Reformation, they had thrust out the mass of
Englishmen from the possession of implements, of houses, and of land.

The rich class, adopting some new process of production for its private gain,
worked it upon those lines of mere competition which its avarice had already
established. Co-operative tradition was dead. Where would it find its cheapest
labour? Obviously among the proletariat—not among the remaining small owners.
What class would increase under the new wealth? Obviously the proletariat again,
without responsibilities, with nothing to leave to its progeny; and as they
swelled the capitalist’s gain, they enabled him with increasing power to buy out
the small owner and send him to swell by another tributary the proletarian
mass.

It was upon this account that the Industrial Revolution, as it is called, took
in its very origins the form which has made it an almost unmixed curse for the
unhappy society in which it has flourished. The rich, already possessed of the
accumulations by which that industrial change could alone be nourished,
inherited all its succeeding accumulations of implements and all its increasing
accumulations of subsistence. The factory system, starting upon a basis of
capitalist and proletariat, grew in the mould which had determined its origins.
With every new advance the capitalist looked for proletariat grist to feed the
productive mill. Every circumstance of that society, the form in which the laws
that governed ownership and profit were cast, the obligations of partners, the
relations bet ween “master” and “man,” directly made for the indefinite
expansion of a subject, formless, wage-earning class controlled by a small body
of owners, which body would tend to become smaller and richer still, and to be
possessed of power ever greater and greater as the bad business unfolded.

The spread of economic oligarchy was everywhere, and not in industry alone. The
great landlords destroyed deliberately and of set purpose and to their own ad
vantage the common rights over common land. The small plutocracy with which they
were knit up, and with whose mercantile elements they were now fused, directed
everything to its own ends. That strong central government which should protect
the community against the rapacity of a few had gone generations before.
Capitalism triumphant wielded all the mechanism of legislation and of
information too. It still holds them; and there is not an example of so-called
“Social Reform” to-day which is not demonstrably (though often subconsciously)
directed to the further entrenchment and confirmation of an industrial society
in which it is taken for granted that a few shall own, that the vast majority
shall live at a wage under them, and that all the bulk of Englishmen may hope
for is the amelioration of their lot by regulations and by control from
above—but not by property; not by freedom.

We all feel—and those few of us who have analysed the matter not only feel but
know—that the Capitalist society thus gradually developed from its origins in
the capture of the land four hundred years ago has reached its term. It is
almost self-evident that it cannot continue in the form which now three
generations have known, and it is equally self-evident that some solution must
be found for the intolerable and increasing instability with which it has
poisoned our lives. But before considering the solutions variously presented by
various schools of thought, I shall in my next section show how and why the
English Capitalist Industrial System is thus intolerably unstable and
consequently presents an acute problem which must be solved under pain of social
death.

It must be noted that modern Industrialism has spread to many other centres from
England. It bears everywhere the features stamped upon it by its origin in this
country.




Section Five
The Capitalist State in Proportion as It Grows Perfect Grows Unstable


From the historical digression which I have introduced by way of illustrating my
subject in the last two sections I now return to the general discussion of my
thesis and to the logical process by which it may be established.

The Capitalist State is unstable, and indeed more properly a transitory phase
lying between two permanent and stable states of society.

In order to appreciate why this is so, let us recall the definition of the
Capitalist State:—

“A society in which the ownership of the means of production is confined to a
body of free citizens, not large enough to make up properly a general character
of that society, while the rest are dispossessed of the means of production, and
are therefore proletarian, we call Capitalist.”

Note the several points of such a state of affairs. You have private ownership;
but it is not private ownership distributed in many hands and thus familiar as
an institution to society as a whole. Again, you have the great majority
dispossessed but at the same time citizens, that is, men politically free to
act, though economically impotent; again, though it is but an inference from our
definition, it is a necessary inference that there will be under Capitalism a
conscious, direct, and planned exploitation of the majority, the free citizens
who do not own by the minority who are owners. For wealth must be produced: the
whole of that community must live: and the possessors can make such terms with
the non-possessors as shall make it certain that a portion of what the
non-possessors have produced shall go to the possessors.

A society thus constituted cannot endure. It cannot endure because it is subject
to two very severe strains: strains which increase in severity in proportion as
that society becomes more thoroughly Capitalist. The first of these strains
arises from the divergence between the moral theories upon which the State
reposes and the social facts which those moral theories attempt to govern. The
second strain arises from the insecurity to which Capitalism condemns the great
mass of society, and the general character of anxiety and peril which it imposes
upon all citizens, but in particular upon the majority, which consists, under
Capitalism, of dispossessed free men.

Of these two strains it is impossible to say which is the gravest. Either would
be enough to destroy a social arrangement in which it was long present. The two
combined make that destruction certain; and there is no longer any doubt that
Capitalist society must transform itself into some other and more stable
arrangement. It is the object of these pages to discover what that stable
arrangement will probably be.

We say that there is a moral strain already intolerably severe and growing more
severe with every perfection of Capitalism.

This moral strain comes from a contradiction between the realities of Capitalist
and the moral base of our laws and traditions.

The moral base upon which our laws are still administered and our conventions
raised presupposes a state composed of free citizens. Our laws defend property
as a normal institution with which all citizens are acquainted, and which all
citizens respect. It punishes theft as an abnormal incident only occurring when,
through evil motives, one free citizen acquires the property of another without
his knowledge and against his will. It punishes fraud as another abnormal
incident in which, from evil motives, one free citizen induces another to part
with his property upon false representations. It enforces contract, the sole
moral base of which is the freedom of the two contracting parties, and the power
of either, if it so please him, not to enter into a contract which, once entered
into, must be enforced. It gives to an owner the power to leave his property by
will, under the conception that such ownership and such passage of property (to
natural heirs as a rule, but exceptionally to any other whom the testator may
point out) is the normal operation of a society generally familiar with such
things, and finding them part of the domestic life lived by the mass of its
citizens. It casts one citizen in damages if by any wilful action he has caused
loss to another—for it presupposes him able to pay.

The sanction upon which social life reposes is, in our moral theory, the legal
punishment enforceable in our Courts, and the basis presupposed for the security
and material happiness of our citizens is the possession of goods which shall
guarantee us from anxiety and permit us an independence of action in the midst
of our fellowmen.

Now contrast all this, the moral theory upon which society is still perilously
conducted, the moral theory to which Capitalism itself turns for succour when it
is attacked, contrast, I say, its formulæ and its presuppositions with the
social reality of a Capitalist State such as is England to-day.

Property remains as an instinct perhaps with most of the citizens; as an
experience and a reality it is unknown to nineteen out of twenty. One hundred
forms of fraud, the necessary corollary of unrestrained competition between a
few and of unrestrained avarice as the motive controlling production, are not or
cannot be punished: petty forms of violence in theft and of cunning in fraud the
laws can deal with, but they cannot deal with these alone. Our legal machinery
has become little more than an engine for protecting the few owners against the
necessities, the demands, or the hatred of the mass of their dispossessed
fellow-citizens. The vast bulk of so-called “free” contracts are to-day leonine
contracts: arrangements which one man was free to take or to leave, but which
the other man was not free to take or to leave, because the second had for his
alternative starvation.

Most important of all, the fundamental social fact of our movement, far more
important than any security afforded by law, or than any machinery which the
State can put into action, is the fact that livelihood is at the will of the
possessors. It can be granted by the possessors to the non-possessors, or it can
be withheld. The real sanction in our society for the arrangements by which it
is conducted is not punishment enforceable by the Courts, but the withholding of
livelihood from the dispossessed by the possessors. Most men now fear the loss
of employment more than they fear legal punishment, and the discipline under
which men are coerced in their modern forms of activity in England is the fear
of dismissal. The true master of the Englishman to-day is not the Sovereign nor
the officers of State, nor, save indirectly, the laws; his true master is the
Capitalist.

Of these main truths everyone is aware; and anyone who sets out to deny them
does so to-day at the peril of his reputation either for honesty or for
intelligence.

If it be asked why things have come to a head so late (Capitalism having been in
growth for so long), the answer is that England, even now the most completely
Capitalist State of the modern world, did not itself become a completely
Capitalist State until the present generation. Within the memory of men now
living half England was agricultural, with relations domestic rather than
competitive between the various human factors to production.

This moral strain, therefore, arising from the divergence between what our laws
and moral phrases pretend, and what our society actually is, makes of that
society an utterly unstable thing.

This spiritual thesis is of far greater gravity than the narrow materialism of a
generation now passing might imagine. Spiritual conflict is more fruitful of
instability in the State than conflict of any other kind, and there is acute
spiritual conflict, conflict in every man’s conscience and ill-ease throughout
the commonwealth when the realities of society are divorced from the moral base
of its institution.

The second strain which we have noted in Capitalism, its second element of
instability, consists in the fact that Capitalism destroys security.

Experience is enough to save us any delay upon this main point of our matter.
But even without experience we could reason with absolute certitude from the
very nature of Capitalism that its chief effect would be the destruction of
security in human life.

Combine these two elements: the ownership of the means of production by a very
few; the political freedom of owners and non-owners alike. There follows
immediately from that combination a competitive market wherein the labour of the
non-owner fetches just what it is worth, not as full productive power, but as
productive power which will leave a surplus to the Capitalist. It fetches
nothing when the labourer cannot work, more in proportion to the pace at which
he is driven; less in middle age than in youth; less in old age than in middle
age; nothing in sickness; nothing in despair.

A man in a position to accumulate (the normal result of human labour), a man
founded upon property in sufficient amount and in established form is no more
productive in his non-productive moments than is a proletarian; but his life is
balanced and regulated by his reception of rent and interest as well as wages.
Surplus values come to him, and are the fly-wheel balancing the extremes of his
life and carrying him over his bad times. With a proletarian it cannot be so.
The aspect from Capital looks at a human being whose labour it proposes to
purchase cuts right across that normal aspect of human life from which we all
regard our own affections, duties, and character. A man thinks of himself, of
his chances and of his security along the line of his own individual existence
from birth to death. Capital purchasing his labour (and not the man himself)
purchases but a cross-section of his life, his moments of activity. For the
rest, he must fend for himself; but to fend for yourself when you have nothing
is to starve.

As a matter of fact, where a few possess the means of production perfectly free
political conditions are impossible. A perfect Capitalist State cannot exist,
though we have come nearer to it in modern England than other and more fortunate
nations had thought possible. In the perfect Capitalist State there would be no
food available for the non-owner save when he was actually engaged in
Production, and that absurdity would, by quickly ending all human lives save
those of the owners, put a term to the arrangement. If you left men completely
free under a Capitalist system, there would be so heavy a mortality from
starvation as would dry up the sources of labour in a very short time.

Imagine the dispossessed to be ideally perfect cowards, the possessors to
consider nothing whatsoever except the buying of their labour in the cheapest
market—and the system would break down from the death of children and of
out-o’-works and of women. You would not have a State in mere decline such as
ours is. You would have a State manifestly and patently perishing.

As a fact, of course, Capitalism cannot proceed to its own logical extreme. So
long as the political freedom of all citizens is granted the freedom of the few
possessors of food to grant or withhold it,of the many non-possessors to strike
any bargain at all, lest they lack it]: to exercise such freedom fully is to
starve the very young, the old, the impotent, and the despairing to death.
Capitalism must keep alive, by non Capitalist methods, great masses of the
population who would otherwise starve to death; and that is what Capitalism was
careful to do to an increasing extent as it got a stronger and a stronger grip
upon the English people. Elizabeth’s Poor Law at the beginning of the business,
the Poor Law of 1834, coming at a moment when nearly half England had passed
into the grip of Capitalism, are original and primitive instances: there are
to-day a hundred others.

Though this cause of insecurity—the fact that the possessors have no direct
incentive to keep men alive—is logically the most obvious,and always the most
enduring under a Capitalist system, there is another cause more poignant in its
effect upon human life. That other cause is the competitive anarchy in
production which restricted ownership coupled with freedom involves. Consider
what is involved by the very process of production where the implements and the
soil are in the hands of a few whose motive for causing the proletariat to
produce is not the use of the wealth created but the enjoyment by those
possessors of surplus value or “profit.”

If full political freedom be allowed to any two such possessors of implements
and stores, each will actively watch his market, attempt to undersell the other,
tend to overproduce at the end of some season of extra demand for his article,
thus glut the market only to suffer a period of depression afterwards— and so
forth. Again, the Capitalist, free, individual director of production, will
miscalculate; sometimes he will fail, and his works will be shut down. Again, a
mass of isolated, imperfectly instructed competing units cannot but direct their
clashing efforts at an enormous waste, and that waste will fluctuate. Most
commissions, most advertisements, most parades, are examples of this waste. If
this waste of effort could be made a constant, the parasitical employment it
afforded would be a constant too. But of its nature it is a most inconstant
thing, and the employment it affords is therefore necessarily precarious. The
concrete translation of this is the insecurity of the commercial traveller, the
advertising agent, the insurance agent, and every form of touting and cozening
which competitive Capitalism carries with it.

Now here again, as in the case of the insecurity produced by age and sickness,
Capitalism cannot be pursued to its logical conclusion, and it is the element of
freedom which suffers. Competition is, as a fact, restricted to an increasing
extent by an understanding between the competitors, accompanied, especially in
this country, by the ruin of the smaller competitor through secret conspiracies
entered into by the larger men, and supported by the secret political forces of
the State.* In a word, Capitalism, proving almost as unstable to the owners as
to the non-owners, is tending towards stability by losing its essential
character of political freedom. No better proof of the instability of Capitalism
as a system could be desired.

* Before any trust is established in this country, the first step is to
“interest” one of our politicians. The Telephones, the South Wales Coal Trust,
the happily defeated Soap Trust, the Soda, Fish, and Fruit Trusts, are examples
in point.

Take any one of the numerous Trusts which now control English industry, and have
made of modern England the type, quoted throughout the Continent, of artificial
monopolies. If the full formula of Capitalism were accepted by our Courts and
our executive statesmen, anyone could start a rival business, undersell those
Trusts and shatter the comparative security they afford to industry within their
field. The reason that no one does this is that political freedom is not, as a
fact, protected here by the Courts in commercial affairs. A man attempting to
compete with one of our great English Trusts would find himself at once
undersold. He might, by all the spirit of European law for centuries,indict
those who would ruin him, citing them for a conspiracy in restraint of trade; of
this conspiracy he would find the judge and the politicians most heartily in
support.

But it must always be remembered that these conspiracies in restraint of trade
which are the mark of modern England are in themselves a mark of the transition
from the true Capitalist phase to another.

Under the essential conditions of Capitalism—under a perfect political
freedom—such conspiracies would be punished by the Courts for what they are: to
wit, a contravention of the fundamental doctrine of political liberty. For this
doctrine, while it gives any man the right to make any contract he chooses with
any labourer and offer the produce at such prices as he sees fit, also involves
the protection of that liberty by the punishment of any conspiracy that may have
monopoly for its object. If such perfect freedom is no longer attempted, if
monopolies are permitted and fostered, it is because the unnatural strain to
which freedom, coupled with restricted ownership, gives rise, the insecurity of
its mere competition, the anarchy of its productive methods have at last proved
intolerable.

I have already delayed more than was necessary in this section upon the causes
which render a Capitalist State essentially unstable.

I might have treated the matter empirically, taking for granted the observation
which all my readers must have made, that Capitalism is as a fact doomed, and
that the Capitalist State has already passed into its first phase of
transition.

We are clearly no longer possessed of that absolutely political freedom which
true Capitalism essentially demands. The insecurity involved, coupled with the
divorce between our traditional morals and the facts of society, have already
introduced such novel features as the permission of conspiracy among both
possessors and non-possessors, the compulsory provision of security through
State action, and all these reforms, implicit or explicit, the tendency of which
I am about to examine.




Section Six
The Stable Solutions of This Instability


Given a capitalist state, of its nature unstable, it will tend to reach
stability by some method or another.

It is the definition of unstable equilibrium that a body in unstable equilibrium
is seeking a stable equilibrium. For instance, a pyramid balanced upon its apex
is in unstable equilibrium; which simply means that a slight force one way or
the other will make it fall into a position where it will repose. Similarly,
certain chemical mixtures are said to be in unstable equilibrium when their
constituent parts have such affinity one for another that a slight shock may
make them combine and transform the chemical arrangement of the whole. Of this
sort are explosives.

If the Capitalist State is in unstable equilibrium, this only means that it is
seeking a stable equilibrium, and that Capitalism cannot but be transformed into
some other arrangement wherein Society may repose.

There are but three social arrangements which can replace Capitalism: Slavery,
Socialism, and Property.

I may imagine a mixture of any two of these three or of all the three, but each
is a dominant type, and from the very nature of the problem no fourth
arrangement can be devised.

The problem turns, remember, upon the control of the means of production.
Capitalism means that this control is vested in the hands of few, while
political freedom is the appanage of all. If this anomaly cannot endure, from
its insecurity and from its own contradiction with its presumed moral basis, you
must either have a transformation of the one or of the other of the two elements
which combined have been found unworkable. These two factors are (1) The
ownership of the means of Production by a few; (2) The Freedom of all. To solve
Capitalism you must get rid of restricted ownership, or of freedom, or of both.
Now there is only one alternative to freedom, which is the negation of it.
Either a man is free to work and not to work as he pleases, or he may be liable
to a legal compulsion to work, backed by the forces of the State. In the first
he is a free man; in the second he is by definition a slave. We have, therefore,
so far as this factor of freedom is concerned, no choice between a number of
changes, but only the opportunity of one, to wit, the establishment of slavery
in place of freedom. Such a solution, the direct, immediate, and conscious
re-establishment of slavery, would provide a true solution of the problems which
Capitalism offers. It would guarantee, under workable regulations, sufficiency
and security for the dispossessed. Such a solution, as I shall show, is the
probable goal which our society will in fact approach. To its immediate and
conscious acceptance, however, there is an obstacle.

A direct and conscious establishment of slavery as a solution to the problem of
Capitalism, the surviving Christian tradition of our civilisation compels men to
reject. No reformer will advocate it; no prophet dares take it as yet for
granted. All theories of a reformed society will therefore attempt, at first, to
leave untouched the factor of Freedom among the elements which make up
Capitalism, and will concern themselves with some change in the factor of
Property.*

* By which word “property” is meant, of course, property in the means of
Production.

Now, in attempting to remedy the evils of Capitalism by remedying that one of
its two factors which consists in an ill distribution of property, you have two,
and only two, courses open to you.

If you are suffering because property is restricted to a few, you can alter that
factor in the problem either by putting property into the hands of many, or by
putting it into the hands of none. There is no third course.

In the concrete, to put property in the hands of “none” means to vest it as a
trust in the hands of political officers. If you say that the evils proceeding
from Capitalism are due to the institution of property itself, and not to the
dispossession of the many by the few, then you must forbid the private
possession of the means of production by any particular and private part of the
community: but someone must control the means of production, or we should have
nothing to eat. So in practice this doctrine means the management of the means
of production by those who are the public officers of the community. Whether
these public officers are themselves controlled by the community or no has
nothing to do with this solution on its economic side. The essential point to
grasp is that the only alternative to private property is public property.
Somebody must see to the ploughing and must control the ploughs; otherwise no
ploughing will be done.

It is equally obvious that if you conclude property in itself to be no evil but
only the small number of its owners, then your remedy is to increase the number
of those owners.

So much being grasped, we may recapitulate and say that a society like ours,
disliking the name of “slavery,” and avoiding a direct and conscious
re-establishment of the slave status, will necessarily contemplate the reform of
its ill-distributed ownership on one of two models. The first is the negation of
private property and the establishment of what is called Collectivism: that is,
the management of the means of production by the political officers of the
community. The second is the wider distribution of property until that
institution shall become the mark of the whole State, and until free citizens
are normally found to be possessors of capital or land, or both.

The first model we call Socialism or the Collectivist State; the second we call
the Proprietary or Distributive State.

With so much elucidated, I will proceed to show in my next section why the
second model, involving the redistribution of property, is rejected as
impracticable by our existing Capitalist Society, and why, therefore, the model
chosen by reformers is the first model, that of a Collectivist State.

I shall then proceed to show that at its first inception all Collectivist Reform
is necessarily deflected and evolves, in the place of what it had intended, a
new thing: a society wherein the owners remain few and wherein the proletarian
mass accepts security at the expense of servitude.

Have I made myself clear?

If not, I will repeat for the third time, and in its briefest terms, the formula
which is the kernel of my whole thesis.

The Capitalist State breeds a Collectivist Theory which in action produces
something utterly different from Collectivism: to wit, the Servile
State.




Section Seven
Socialism Is the Easiest Apparent Solution of the Capitalist Crux


I say that the line of least resistance, if it be followed, leads a Capitalist
State to transform itself into a Servile State.

I propose to show that this comes about from the fact that not a Distributive
but a Collectivist solution is the easiest for a Capitalist State to aim at, and
that yet, in the very act of attempting Collectivism, what results is not
Collectivism at all, but the servitude of the many, and the confirmation in
their present privilege of the few; that is, the Servile State.

Men to whom the institution of slavery is abhorrent propose for the remedy of
Capitalism one of two reforms.

Either they would put property into the hands of most citizens, so dividing land
and capital that a determining number of families in the State were possessed of
the means of production; or they would put those means of production into the
hands of the political officers of the community, to be held in trust for the
advantage of all.

The first solution may be called the attempted establishment of the Distributive
State. The second may be called the attempted establishment of the Collectivist
State.

Those who favour the first course are the Conservatives or Traditionalists. They
are men who respect and would, if possible, preserve the old forms of Christian
European life. They know that property was thus distributed throughout the State
during the happiest periods of our past history; they also know that where it is
properly distributed to-day, you have greater social sanity and ease than
elsewhere. In general, those who would re-establish, if possible, the
Distributive State in the place of, and as a remedy for, the vices and unrest of
Capitalism, are men concerned with known realities, and having for their ideal a
condition of society which experience has tested and proved both stable and
good. They are then, of the two schools of reformers, the more practical in the
sense that they deal more than do the Collectivists (called also Socialists)
with things which either are or have been in actual existence. But they are less
practical in another sense (as we shall see in a moment) from the fact that the
stage of the disease with which they are dealing does not readily lend itself to
such a reaction as they propose.

The Collectivist,on the other hand, proposes to put land and capital into the
hands of the political officers of the community,and this on the understanding
that they shall hold such land and capital in trust for the advantage of the
community. In making this proposal he is evidently dealing with a state of
things hitherto imaginary, and his ideal is not one that has been tested by
experience, nor one of which our race and history can furnish instances. In this
sense, therefore, he is the less practical of the two reformers. His ideal
cannot be discovered in any past, known, and recorded phase of our society. We
cannot examine Socialism in actual working, nor can we say (as we can say of
well-divided property): “On such and such an occasion, in such and such a period
of European history, Collectivism was established and produced both stability
and happiness in society.”

In this sense, therefore, the Collectivist is far less practical than the
reformer who desires well-distributed property.

On the other hand, there is a sense in which this Socialist is more practical
than that other type of reformer, from the fact that the stage of the disease
into which we have fallen apparently admits of his remedy with less shock than
it admits of a reaction towards well-divided property.

For example: the operation of buying out some great tract of private ownership
to-day (as a railway or a harbour company) with public funds, continuing its
administration by publicly paid officials and converting its revenue to public
use, is a thing with which we are familiar and which seemingly might be
indefinitely multiplied. Individual examples of such transformation of
waterworks, gas, tramways, from a Capitalist to a Collectivist basis are common,
and the change does not disturb any fundamental thing in our society. When a
private Water company or Tramway line is bought by some town and worked
thereafter in the interests of the public, the transaction is effected without
any perceptible friction, disturbs the life of no private citizen, and seems in
every way normal to the society in which it takes place.

Upon the contrary, the attempt to create a large number of shareholders in such
enterprises and artificially to substitute many partners, distributed throughout
a great number of the population, in the place of the original few capitalist
owners, would prove lengthy and at every step would arouse opposition, would
create disturbance, would work at an expense of great friction, and would be
imperilled by the power of the new and many owners to sell again to a
few.

In a word, the man who desires to re-establish property as an institution normal
to most citizens in the State is working against the grain of our existing
Capitalist society, while a man who desires to establish Socialism—that is
Collectivism—is working with the grain of that society. The first is like a
physician who should say to a man whose limbs were partially atrophied from
disuse: “Do this and that, take such and such exercise, and you will recover the
use of your limbs.” The second is like a physician who should say: “You cannot
go on as you are. Your limbs are atrophied from lack of use. Your attempt to
conduct yourself as though they were not is useless and painful; you had better
make up your mind to be wheeled about in a fashion consonant to your disease.”
The Physician is the Reformer, his Patient the Proletariat.

It is not the purpose of this book to show how and under what difficulties a
condition of well-divided property might be restored and might take the place
(even in England) of that Capitalism which is now no longer either stable or
tolerable; but for the purposes of contrast and to emphasise my argument I will
proceed, before showing how the Collectivist unconsciously makes for the Servile
State, to show what difficulties surround the Distributive solution and why,
therefore, the Collectivist solution appeals so much more readily to men living
under Capitalism.

If I desire to substitute a number of small owners for a few large ones in some
particular enterprise, how shall I set to work?

I might boldly confiscate and redistribute at a blow. But by what process should
I choose the new owners? Even supposing that there was some machinery whereby
the justice of the new distribution could be assured, how could I avoid the
enormous and innumerable separate acts of injustice that would attach to general
redistributions? To say “none shall own” and to confiscate is one thing; to say
“all should own” and apportion ownership is another. Action of this kind would
so disturb the whole network of economic relations as to bring ruin at once to
the whole body politic, and particularly to the smaller interests indirectly
affected. In a society such as ours a catastrophe falling upon the State from
outside might indirectly do good by making such a redistribution possible. But
no one working from within the State could provoke that catastrophe without
ruining his own cause.

If, then, I proceed more slowly and more rationally and canalise the economic
life of society so that small property shall gradually be built up within it,
see against what forces of inertia and custom I have to work to-day in a
Capitalist society!

If I desire to benefit small savings at the expense of large, I must reverse the
whole economy under which interest is paid upon deposits to-day. It is far
easier to save £100 out of a revenue of £1,000 than to save £10 out of a revenue
of £100. It is infinitely easier to save £10 out of a revenue of £100 than £5
out of a revenue of £50. To build up small property through thrift when once the
Mass have fallen into the proletarian trough is impossible unless you
deliberately subsidise small savings, offering them a reward which, in
competition,they could never obtain; and to do this the whole vast arrangement
of credit must be worked backwards. Or, let the policy be pursued of penalising
undertakings with few owners, of heavily taxing large blocks of shares and of
subsidising with the produce small holders in proportion to the smallness of
their holding. Here again you are met with the difficulty of a vast majority who
cannot even bid for the smallest share.

One might multiply instances of the sort indefinitely, but the strongest force
against the distribution of ownership in a society already permeated with
Capitalist modes of thought is still the moral one: Will men want to own? Will
officials, administrators, and lawmakers be able to shake off the power which
under Capitalism seems normal to the rich? If I approach, for instance, the
works of one of our great Trusts, purchase it with public money, bestow, even as
a gift,the shares thereof to its workmen, can I count upon any tradition of
property in their midst which will prevent their squandering the new wealth? Can
I discover any relics of the co-operative instinct among such men? Could I get
managers and organisers to take a group of poor men seriously or to serve them
as they would serve rich men? Is not the whole psychology of a Capitalist
society divided between the proletarian mass which thinks in terms not of
property but of “employment,” and the few owners who are alone familiar with the
machinery of administration?

I have touched but very briefly and superficially upon this matter, because it
needs no elaboration. Though it is evident that with a sufficient will and a
sufficient social vitality property could be restored, it is evident that all
efforts to restore it have in a Capitalist society such as our own a note of
oddity, of doubtful experiment, of being uncoordinated with other social things
around them, which marks the heavy handicap under which any such attempt must
proceed. It is like recommending elasticity to the aged.

On the other hand, the Collectivist experiment is thoroughly suited (in
appearance at least) to the Capitalist society which it proposes to replace. It
works with the existing machinery of Capitalism, talks and thinks in the
existing terms of Capitalism, appeals to just those appetites which Capitalism
has aroused, and ridicules as fantastic and unheard-of just those things in
society the memory of which Capitalism has killed among men wherever the blight
of it has spread.

So true is all this that the stupider kind of Collectivist will often talk of a
“Capitalist phase” of society as the necessary precedent to a “Collectivist
phase.” A trust or monopoly is welcomed because it “furnishes a mode of
transition from private to public ownership.” Collectivism promises employment
to the great mass who think of production only in terms of employment. It
promises to its workmen the security which a great and well-organised industrial
Capitalist unit (like one of our railways) can give through a system of
pensions, regular promotion, etc., but that security vastly increased through
the fact that it is the State and not a mere unit of the State which guarantees
it. Collectivism would administer, would pay wages, would promote, would pension
off, would fine—and all the rest of it—exactly as the Capitalist State does
to-day. The proletarian, when the Collectivist (or Socialist) State is put
before him, perceives nothing in the picture save certain ameliorations of his
present position. Who can imagine that if, say, two of our great industries,
Coal and Railways, were handed over to the State tomorrow, the armies of men
organised therein would find any change in the character of their lives, save in
some increase of security and possibly in a very slight increase of
earnings?

The whole scheme of Collectivism presents, so far as the proletarian mass of a
Capitalist State is concerned, nothing unknown at all, but a promise of some
increment in wages and a certainty of far greater ease of mind.

To that small minority of a Capitalist society which owns the means of
production, Collectivism will of course appear as an enemy, but, even so, it is
an enemy which they understand and an enemy with whom they can treat in terms
common both to that enemy and to themselves. If, for instance, the State
proposes to take over such and such a trust now paying 4 per cent. and believes
that under State management it will make the trust pay 5 per cent. then the
transference takes the form of a business proposition: the State is no harder to
the Capitalists taken over than was Mr Yerkes to the Underground. Again, the
State, having greater credit and longevity, can (it would seem)* “buy out” any
existing Capitalist body upon favourable terms. Again, the discipline by which
the State would enforce its rules upon the proletariat it employed would be the
same rules as those by which the Capitalist imposes discipline in his own
interests to-day.

* That this is an illusion I shall attempt to show on a later page.

There is in the whole scheme which proposes to transform the Capitalist into the
Collectivist State no element of reaction, the use of no term with which a
Capitalist society is not familiar, the appeal to no instinct, whether of
cowardice, greed, apathy, or mechanical regulation, with which a Capitalist
community is not amply familiar.

In general, if modern Capitalist England were made by magic a State of small
owners, we should all suffer an enormous revolution. We should marvel at the
insolence of the poor, at the laziness of the contented, at the strange
diversities of task, at the rebellious, vigorous personalities discernible upon
every side. But if this modern Capitalist England could, by a process
sufficiently slow to allow for the readjustment of individual interests, be
transformed into a Collectivist State, the apparent change at the end of that
transition would not be conspicuous to the most of us, and the transition itself
should have met with no shocks that theory can discover. The insecure and
hopeless margin below the regularly paid ranks of labour would have disappeared
into isolated workplaces of a penal kind: we should hardly miss them. Many
incomes now involving considerable duties to the State would have been replaced
by incomes as large or larger, involving much the same duties and bearing only
the newer name of salaries. The small shop-keeping class would find itself in
part absorbed under public schemes at a salary, in part engaged in the old work
of distribution at secure incomes; and such small owners as are left, of boats,
of farms, even of machinery, would perhaps know the new state of things into
which they had survived through nothing more novel than some increase in the
irritating system of inspection and of onerous petty taxation: they are already
fairly used to both.

This picture of the natural transition from Capitalism to Collectivism seems so
obvious that many Collectivists in a generation immediately past believed that
nothing stood between them and the realisation of their ideal save the
unintelligence of mankind. They had only to argue and expound patiently and
systematically for the great transformation to become possible. They had only to
continue arguing and expounding for it at last to be realised.

I say, “of the last generation.” to-day that simple and superficial judgment is
getting woefully disturbed. The most sincere and single-minded of Collectivists
cannot but note that the practical effect of their propaganda is not an approach
towards the Collectivist State at all, but towards something very different. It
is becoming more and more evident that with every new reform—and those reforms
commonly promoted by particular Socialists, and in a puzzled way blessed by
Socialists in general—another state emerges more and more clearly. It is
becoming increasingly certain that the attempted transformation of Capitalism
into Collectivism is resulting not in Collectivism at all, but in some third
thing which the Collectivist never dreamt of, or the Capitalist either; and that
third thing is the Servile State: a State, that is, in which the mass of men
shall be constrained by law to labour to the profit of a minority, but, as the
price of such constraint, shall enjoy a security which the old Capitalism did
not give them.

Why is the apparently simple and direct action of Collectivist reform diverted
into so unexpected a channel? And in what new laws and institutions does modern
England in particular and industrial society in general show that this new form
of the State is upon us?

To these two questions I will attempt an answer in the two concluding divisions
of this book.




Section Eight
The Reformers and Reformed Are Alike Making for the Servile State


I propose in this section to show how the three interests which between them
account for nearly the whole of the forces making for social change in modern
England are all necessarily drifting towards the Servile State.

Of these three interests the first two represent the Reformers—the third the
people to be Reformed.

These three interests are, first, the Socialist, who is the theoretical reformer
working along the line of least resistance; secondly, the “Practical Man” who as
a “practical” reformer depends on his shortness of sight, and is therefore
to-day a powerful factor; while the third is that great proletarian mass for
whom the change is being effected, and on whom it is being imposed. What they
are most likely to accept, the way in which they will react upon new
institutions is the most important factor of all, for they are the material with
and upon which the work is being done.

(1) Of the Socialist Reformer:

I say that men attempting to achieve Collectivism or Socialism as the remedy for
the evils of the Capitalist State find themselves drifting not towards a
Collectivist State at all, but towards a Servile State.

The Socialist movement, the first of the three factors in this drift, is itself
made up of two kinds of men: there is (a) the man who regards the public
ownership of the means of production (and the consequent compulsion of all
citizens to work under the direction of the State) as the only feasible solution
of our modern social ills. There is also (b) the man who loves the Collectivist
ideal in itself, who does not pursue it so much because it is a solution of
modern Capitalism, as because it is an ordered and regular form of society which
appeals to him in itself. He loves to consider the ideal of a State in which
land and capital shall be held by public officials who shall order other men
about and so preserve them from the consequences of their vice, ignorance, and
folly.

These types are perfectly distinct, in many respects antagonistic, and between
them they cover the whole Socialist movement.

Now imagine either of these men at issue with the existing state of Capitalist
society and attempting to transform it. Along what line of least resistance will
either be led?

(a) The first type will begin by demanding the confiscation of the means of
production from the hands of their present owners, and the vesting of them in
the State. But wait a moment. That demand is an exceedingly hard thing to
accomplish. The present owners have between them and confiscation a stony moral
barrier. It is what most men would call the moral basis of property (the
instinct that property is a right), and what all men would admit to be at least
a deeply rooted tradition. Again, they have behind them the innumerable
complexities of modern ownership.

To take a very simple case. Decree that all common lands enclosed since so late
a date as 1760 shall revert to the public. There you have a very moderate case
and a very defensible one. But conceive for a moment how many small freeholds,
what a nexus of obligation and benefit spread over millions, what thousands of
exchanges, what purchases made upon the difficult savings of small men such a
measure would wreck! It is conceivable, for, in the moral sphere, society can do
anything to society; but it would bring crashing down with it twenty times the
wealth involved and all the secure credit of our community. In a word, the thing
is, in the conversational use of that term, impossible. So your best type of
Socialist reformer is led to an expedient which I will here only mention—as it
must be separately considered at length later on account of its fundamental
importance—the expedient of “buying out” the present owner.

It is enough to say in this place that the attempt to “buy out” without
confiscation is based upon an economic error. This I shall prove in its proper
place. For the moment I assume it and pass on to the rest of my reformer’s
action.

He does not confiscate, then; at the most he “buys out” (or attempts to “buy
out”) certain sections of the means of production.

But this action by no means covers the whole of his motive. By definition the
man is out to cure what he sees to be the great immediate evils of Capitalist
society. He is out to cure the destitution which it causes in great multitudes
and the harrowing insecurity which it imposes upon all. He is out to substitute
for Capitalist society a society in which men shall all be fed, clothed, housed,
and in which men shall not live in a perpetual jeopardy of their housing,
clothing, and food.

Well, there is a way of achieving that without confiscation.

This reformer rightly thinks that the ownership of the means of production by a
few has caused the evils which arouse his indignation and pity. But they have
only been so caused on account of a combination of such limited ownership with
universal freedom. The combination of the two is the very definition of the
Capitalist State. It is difficult indeed to dispossess the possessors. It is by
no means so difficult (as we shall see again when we are dealing with the mass
whom these changes will principally affect) to modify the factor of
freedom.

You can say to the Capitalist: “I desire to dispossess you, and meanwhile I am
determined that your employees shall live tolerable lives.” The Capitalist
replies: “I refuse to be dispossessed, and it is, short of catastrophe,
impossible to dispossess me. But if you will define the relation between my
employees and myself, I will undertake particular responsibilities due to my
position. Subject the proletarian, as a proletarian, and because he is a
proletarian, to special laws. Clothe me, the Capitalist, as a Capitalist, and
because I am a Capitalist, with special converse duties under those laws. I will
faithfully see that they are obeyed; I will compel my employees to obey them,
and I will undertake the new role imposed upon me by the State. Nay, I will go
further, and I will say that such a novel arrangement will make my own profits
perhaps larger and certainly more secure.”

This idealist social reformer, therefore, finds the current of his demand
canalised. As to one part of it, confiscation, it is checked and barred; as to
the other, securing human conditions for the proletariat, the gates are open.
Half the river is dammed by a strong weir, but there is a sluice, and that
sluice can be lifted. Once lifted, the whole force of the current will run
through the opportunity so afforded it; there will it scour and deepen its
channel; there will the main stream learn to run.

To drop the metaphor, all those things in the true Socialist’s demand which are
compatible with the Servile State can certainly be achieved. The first steps
towards them are already achieved. They are of such a nature that upon them can
be based a further advance in the same direction, and the whole Capitalist State
can be rapidly and easily transformed into the Servile State, satisfying in its
transformation the more immediate claims and the more urgent demands of the
social reformer whose ultimate objective indeed may be the public ownership of
capital and land, but whose driving power is a burning pity for the poverty and
peril of the masses.

When the transformation is complete there will be no ground left, nor any demand
or necessity, for public ownership. The reformer only asked for it in order to
secure security and sufficiency: he has obtained his demand.

Here are security and sufficiency achieved by another and much easier method,
consonant with and proceeding from the Capitalist phase immediately preceding
it: there is no need to go further.

In this way the Socialist whose motive is human good and not mere organisation
is being shepherded in spite of himself away from his Collectivist ideal and
towards a society in which the possessors shall remain possessed, the
dispossessed shall remain dispossessed, in which the mass of men shall still
work for the advantage of a few, and in which those few shall still enjoy the
surplus values produced by labour, but in which the special evils of insecurity
and insufficiency, in the main the product of freedom, have been eliminated by
the destruction of freedom.

At the end of the process you will have two kinds of men, the owners
economically free, and controlling to their peace and to the guarantee of their
livelihood the economically unfree non-owners. But that is the Servile
State.

(b) The second type of socialist reformer may be dealt with more briefly. In him
the exploitation of man by man excites no indignation. Indeed, he is not of a
type to which indignation or any other lively passion is familiar. Tables,
statistics, an exact framework for life—these afford him the food that satisfies
his moral apetite; the occupation most congenial to him is the “running” of men:
as a machine is run.

To such a man the Collectivist ideal particularly appeals.

It is orderly in the extreme. All that human and organic complexity which is the
colour of any vital society offends him by its infinite differentiation. He is
disturbed by multitudinous things; and the prospect of a vast bureaucracy
wherein the whole of life shall be scheduled and appointed to certain simple
schemes deriving from the coordinate work of public clerks and marshalled by
powerful heads of departments gives his small stomach a final satisfaction.

Now this man, like the other, would prefer to begin with public property in
capital and land, and upon that basis to erect the formal scheme which so suits
his peculiar temperament. (It need hardly be said that in his vision of a future
society he conceives of himself as the head of at least a department and
possibly of the whole State—but that is by the way.) But while he would prefer
to begin with a Collectivist scheme ready-made, he finds in practice that he
cannot do so. He would have to confiscate just as the more hearty Socialist
would; and if that act is very difficult to the man burning at the sight of
human wrongs, how much more difficult is it to a man impelled by no such motive
force and directed by nothing more intense than a mechanical appetite for
regulation?

He cannot confiscate or begin to confiscate. At the best he will “buy out” the
Capitalist.

Now, in his case, as in the case of the more human Socialist, “buying out” is,
as I shall show in its proper place, a system impossible of general
application.

But all those other things for which such a man cares much more than he does for
the socialisation of the means of production—tabulation, detailed administration
of men, the co-ordination of many efforts under one schedule, the elimination
of all private power to react against his Department, all these are immediately
obtainable without disturbing the existing arrangement of society. With him,
precisely as with the other socialist, what he desires can be reached without
any dispossession of the few existing possessors. He has but to secure the
registration of the proletariat; next to ensure that neither they in the
exercise of their freedom, nor the employer in the exercise of his, can produce
insufficiency or insecurity—and he is content. Let laws exist which make the
proper housing, feeding, clothing, and recreation of the proletarian mass be
incumbent upon the possessing class, and the observance of such rules be
imposed, by inspection and punishment, upon those whom he pretends to benefit,
and all that he really cares for will be achieved.

To such a man the Servile State is hardly a thing towards which he drifts, it is
rather a tolerable alternative to his ideal Collectivist State, which
alternative he is quite prepared to accept and regards favourably. Already the
greater part of such reformers who, a generation ago, would have called
themselves “Socialists” are now less concerned with any scheme for socialising
Capital and Land than with innumerable schemes actually existing, some of them
possessing already the force of laws, for regulating, “running,” and drilling
the protelariat without trenching by an inch upon the privilege in implements,
stores, and land enjoyed by the small Capitalist class.

The so-called “Socialist” of this type has not fallen into the Servile State by
a miscalculation. He has fathered it; he welcomes its birth, he foresees his
power over its future.

So much for the Socialist movement, which a generation ago proposed to transform
our Capitalist society into one where the community should be the universal
owner and all men equally economically free or unfree under its tutelage. To-day
their ideal has failed, and of the two sources whence their energy proceeded,
the one is reluctantly, the other gladly, acquiescent in the advent of a society
which is not Socialist at all but Servile.

(2) Of the Practical Reformer:

There is another type of Reformer, one who prides himself on not being a
socialist, and one of the greatest weight to-day. He also is making for the
Servile State. This second factor in the change is the “Practical Man”; and this
fool, on account of his great numbers and determining influence in the details
of legislation, must be carefully examined.

It is your “Practical Man” who says: “Whatever you theorists and doctrinaires
may hold with regard to this proposal (which I support), though it may offend
some abstract dogma of yours, yet in practice you must admit that it does good.
If you had practical experience of the misery of the Jones’ family, or had done
practical work yourself in Pudsey, you would have seen that a practical man,”
etc.

It is not difficult to discern that the Practical Man in social reform is
exactly the same animal as the Practical Man in every other department of human
energy, and may be discovered suffering from the same twin disabilities which
stamp the Practical Man where-ever found: these twin disabilities are an
inability to define his own first principles and an inability to follow the
consequences proceeding from his own action. Both these disabilities proceed
from one simple and deplorable form of impotence, the inability to
think.

Let us help the Practical Man in his weakness and do a little thinking for
him.

As a social reformer he has of course (though he does not know it) first
principles and dogmas like all the rest of us, and his first principles and
dogmas are exactly the same as those which his intellectual superiors hold in
the matter of social reform. The two things intolerable to him as a decent
citizen (though a very stupid human being) are insufficiency and insecurity.
When he was “working” in the slums of Pudsey or raiding the proletarian Jones’s
from the secure base of Toynbee Hall, what shocked the worthy man most was
“unemployment” and “destitution”: that is, insecurity and insufficiency in flesh
and blood.

Now, if the Socialist who has thought out his case, whether as a mere organiser
or as a man hungering and thirsting after justice, is led away from Socialism
and towards the Servile State by the force of modern things in England, how much
more easily do you not think the “Practical Man” will be conducted towards that
same Servile State, like any donkey to his grazing ground? To those dull and
shortsighted eyes the immediate solution which even the beginnings of the
Servile State propose are what a declivity is to a piece of brainless matter.
The piece of brainless matter rolls down the declivity, and the Practical Man
lollops from Capitalism to the Servile State with the same inevitable ease.
Jones has not got enough. If you give him something in charity, that something
will be soon consumed, and then Jones will again not have enough. Jones has been
seven weeks out of work. If you get him work “under our unorganised and wasteful
system, etc.,” he may lose it just as he lost his first jobs. The slums of
Pudsey, as the Practical Man knows by Practical experience, are often
unemployable. Then there are “the ravages of drink”: more fatal still the
dreadful habit mankind has of forming families and breeding children. The worthy
fellow notes that “as a practical matter of fact such men do not work unless you
make them.”

He does not, because he cannot, coordinate all these things. He knows nothing of
a society in which free men were once owners, nor of the co-operative and
instinctive institutions for the protection of ownership which such a society
spontaneously breeds. He “takes the world as he finds it”—and the consequence is
that whereas men of greater capacity may admit with different degrees of
reluctance the general principles of the Servile State, he, the Practical Man,
positively gloats on every new detail in the building up of that form of
society. And the destruction of freedom by inches (though he does not see it to
be the destruction of freedom) is the one panacea so obvious that he marvels at
the doctrinaires who resist or suspect the process.

It has been necessary to waste so much time on this deplorable individual
because the circumstances of our generation give him a peculiar power. Under the
conditions of modern exchange a man of that sort enjoys great advantages. He is
to be found as he never was in any other society before our own, possessed of
wealth, and political as never was any such citizen until our time. Of history
with all its lessons; of the great schemes of philosophy and religion, of human
nature itself he is blank.

The Practical Man left to himself would not produce the Servile State. He would
not produce anything but a welter of anarchic restrictions which would lead at
last to some kind of revolt.

Unfortunately, he is not left to himself. He is but the ally or flanking party
of great forces which he does nothing to oppose, and of particular men, able and
prepared for the work of general change, who use him with gratitude and
contempt. Were he not so numerous in modern England, and, under the
extraordinary conditions of a Capitalist State, so economically powerful, I
would have neglected him in this analysis. As it is, we may console ourselves by
remembering that the advent of the Servile State, with its powerful organisation
and necessity for lucid thought in those who govern, will certainly eliminate
him.

Our reformers, then, both those who think and those who do not, both those who
are conscious of the process and those who are unconscious of it, are making
directly for the Servile State.

(3) What of the third factor? What of the people about to be reformed? What of
the millions upon whose carcasses the reformers are at work, and who are the
subject of the great experiment? Do they tend, as material, to accept or to
reject that transformation from free proletarianism to servitude which is the
argument of this book?

The question is an important one to decide, for upon whether the material is
suitable or unsuitable for the work to which it is subjected, depends the
success of every experiment making for the Servile State.

The mass of men in the Capitalist State is proletarian. As a matter of
definition, the actual number of the proletariat and the proportion that number
bears to the total number of families in the State may vary, but must be
sufficient to determine the general character of the State before we can call
that State Capitalist.

But, as we have seen, the Capitalist State is not a stable, and therefore not a
permanent, condition of society. It has proved ephemeral; and upon that very
account the proletariat in any Capitalist State retains to a greater or less
degree some memories of a state of society in which its ancestors were
possessors of property and economically free.

The strength of this memory or tradition is the first element we have to bear in
mind in our problem, when we examine how far a particular proletariat, such as
the English proletariat to-day, is ready to accept the Servile State, which
would condemn it to a perpetual loss of property and of all the free habit which
property engenders.

Next be it noted that under conditions of freedom the Capitalist class may be
entered by the more cunning or the more fortunate of the proletariat class.
Recruitment of the kind was originally sufficiently common in the first
development of Capitalism to be a standing feature in society and to impress the
imagination of the general. Such recruitment is still possible. The proportion
which it bears to the whole proletariat, the chance which each member of the
proletariat may think he has of escaping from his proletarian condition in a
particular phase of Capitalism such as is ours to-day, is the second factor in
the problem.

The third factor, and by far the greatest of all, is the appetite of the
dispossessed for that security and sufficiency of which Capitalism, with its
essential condition of freedom, has deprived them.

Now let us consider the interplay of these three factors in the English
proletariat as we actually know it at this moment. That proletariat is certainly
the great mass of the State: it covers about nineteen-twentieths of the
population—if we exclude Ireland, where, as I shall point out in my concluding
pages, the reaction against Capitalism, and therefore against its development
towards a Servile State, is already successful.

As to the first factor, it has changed very rapidly within the memory of men now
living. The traditional rights of property are still strong in the minds of the
English poor. All the moral connotations of that right are familiar to them.
They are familiar with the conception of theft as a wrong; they are tenacious of
any scraps of property which they may acquire. They could all explain what is
meant by ownership, by legacy, by exchange, and by gift, and even by contract.
There is not one but could put himself in the position, mentally, of an
owner.

But the actual experience of ownership, and the effect which that experience has
upon character and upon one’s view of the State is a very different matter.
Within the memory of people still living a sufficient number of Englishmen were
owning (as small freeholders, small masters, etc.) to give to the institution of
property coupled with freedom a very vivid effect upon the popular mind. More
than this, there was a living tradition proceeding from the lips of men who
could still bear living testimony to the relics of a better state of things. I
have myself spoken, when I was a boy, to old labourers in the neighbourhood of
Oxford who had risked their skins in armed protest against the enclosure of
certain commons, and who had of course suffered imprisonment by a wealthy judge
as the reward of their courage; and I have myself spoken in Lancashire to old
men who could retrace for me, either from their personal experience the last
phases of small ownership in the textile trade, or, from what their fathers had
told them, the conditions of a time when small and well-divided ownership in
cottage looms was actually common.

All that has passed. The last chapter of its passage has been singularly rapid.
Roughly speaking, it is the generation brought up under the Education Acts of
the last forty years which has grown up definitely and hopelessly proletarian.
The present instinct, use, and meaning of property is lost to it: and this has
had two very powerful effects, each strongly inclining our modern wage-earners
to ignore the old barriers which lay between a condition of servitude and a
condition of freedom. The first effect is this: that property is no longer what
they seek, nor what they think obtainable for themselves. The second effect is
that they regard the possessors of property as a class apart, whom they always
must ultimately obey, often envy, and sometimes hate; whose moral right to so
singular a position most of them would hesitate to concede, and many of them
would now strongly deny, but whose position they, at any rate, accept as a known
and permanent social fact, the origins of which they have forgotten, and the
foundations of which they believe to be immemorial.

To sum up: The attitude of the proletariat in England to-day (the attitude of
the overwhelming majority, that is, of English families) towards property and
towards that freedom which is alone obtainable through property is no longer an
attitude of experience or of expectation. They think of themselves as
wage-earners. To increase the weekly stipend of the wage-earner is an object
which they vividly appreciate and pursue. To make him cease to be a wage earner
is an object that would seem to them entirely outside the realities of
life.

What of the second factor, the gambling chance which the Capitalist system, with
its necessary condition of freedom, of the legal power to bargain fully, and so
forth, permits to the proletarian of escaping from his proletariat
surroundings?

Of this gambling chance and the effect it has upon men’s minds we may say that,
while it has not disappeared, it has very greatly lost in force during the last
forty years. One often meets men who tell one, whether they are speaking in
defence of or against the Capitalist system, that it still blinds the
proletarian to any common consciousness of class, because the proletarian still
has the example before him of members of his class, whom he has known, rising
(usually by various forms of villainy) to the position of capitalist. But when
one goes down among the working men themselves, one discovers that the hope of
such a change in the mind of any individual worker is now exceedingly remote.
Millions of men in great groups of industry, notably in the transport industry
and in the mines, have quite given up such an expectation. Tiny as the chance
ever was, exaggerated as the hopes in a lottery always are, that tiny chance has
fallen in the general opinion of the workers to be negligible, and that hope
which a lottery breeds is extinguished. The proletarian now regards himself as
definitely proletarian, nor destined within human likelihood to be anything but
proletarian.

These two factors, then, the memory of an older condition of economic freedom,
and the effect of a hope individuals might entertain of escaping from the
wage-earning class, the two factors which might act most strongly against the
acceptation of the Servile State by that class, have so fallen in value that
they offer but little opposition to the third factor in the situation which is
making so strongly for the Servile State, and which consists in the necessity
all men acutely feel for sufficiency and for security. It is this third factor
alone which need be seriously considered to-day, when we ask ourselves how far
the material upon which social reform is working, that is, the masses of the
people, may be ready to accept the change.

The thing may be put in many ways. I will put it in what I believe to be the
most conclusive of all.

If you were to approach those millions of families now living at a wage, with
the proposal for a contract of service for life, guaranteeing them employment at
what each regarded as his usual full wage, how many would refuse?

Such a contract would, of course, involve a loss of freedom: a life-contract of
the kind is, to be accurate, no contract at all. It is the negation of contract
and the acceptation of status. It would lay the man that undertook it under an
obligation of forced labour, coterminous and coincident with his power to
labour. It would be a permanent renunciation of his right (if such a right
exists) to the surplus values created by his labour. If we ask ourselves how
many men, or rather how many families, would prefer freedom (with its
accompaniments of certain insecurity and possible insufficiency) to such a
life-contract, no one can deny that the answer is: “Very few would refuse it.”
That is the key to the whole matter.

What proportion would refuse it no one can determine; but I say that even as a
voluntary offer, and not as a compulsory obligation, a contract of this sort
which would for the future destroy contract and re-erect status of a servile
sort would be thought a boon by the mass of the proletariat to-day.

Now take the truth from another aspect—by considering it thus from one point of
view and from another we can appreciate it best—Of what are the mass of men now
most afraid in a Capitalist State? Not of the punishments that can be inflicted
by a Court of Law, but of “the sack.”

You may ask a man why he does not resist such and such a legal infamy; why he
permits himself to be the victim of fines and deductions from which the Truck
Acts specifically protect him; why he cannot assert his opinion in this or that
matter; why he has accepted, without a blow, such and such an insult.

Some generations ago a man challenged to tell you why he forswore his manhood in
any particular regard would have answered you that it was because he feared
punishment at the hands of the law; to-day he will tell you that it is because
he fears unemployment.

Private law has for the second time in our long European story overcome public
law, and the sanctions which the Capitalist can call to the aid of his private
rule, by the action of his private will, are stronger than those which the
public Courts can impose.

In the seventeenth century a man feared to go to Mass lest the judges should
punish him. To-day a man fears to speak in favour of some social theory which he
holds to be just and true lest his master should punish him. To deny the rule of
public powers once involved public punishments which most men dreaded, though
some stood out. To deny the rule of private powers involves to-day a private
punishment against the threat of which very few indeed dare to stand
out.

Look at the matter from yet another aspect. A law is passed (let us suppose)
which increases the total revenue of a wage-earner, or guarantees him against
the insecurity of his position in some small degree. The administration of that
law requires, upon the one hand, a close inquisition into the man’s
circumstances by public officials, and, upon the other hand, the administration
of its benefits by that particular Capitalist or group of Capitalists whom the
wage-earner serves to enrich. Do the Servile conditions attaching to this
material benefit prevent a proletarian in England to-day from preferring the
benefit to freedom? It is notorious that they do not.

No matter from what angle you approach the business, the truth is always the
same. That great mass of wage-earners upon which our society now reposes
understands as a present good all that will increase even to some small amount
their present revenue and all that may guarantee them against those perils of
insecurity to which they are perpetually subject. They understand and welcome a
good of this kind, and they are perfectly willing to pay for that good the
corresponding price of control and enregimentation, exercised in gradually
increasing degree by those who are their paymasters.

It would be easy by substituting superficial for fundamental things, or even by
proposing certain terms and phrases to be used in the place of terms and phrases
now current it would be easy, I say, by such methods to ridicule or to oppose
the prime truths which I am here submitting. They none the less remain
truths.

Substitute for the term “employee” in one of our new laws the term “serf,” even
do so mild a thing as to substitute the traditional term “master” for the word
“employer,” and the blunt words might breed revolt. Impose of a sudden the full
conditions of a Servile State upon modern England, and it would certainly breed
revolt. But my point is that when the foundations of the thing have to be laid
and the first great steps taken, there is no revolt; on the contrary, there is
acquiescence and for the most part gratitude upon the part of the poor. After
the long terrors imposed upon them through a freedom unaccompanied by property,
they see, at the expense of losing a mere legal freedom, the very real prospect
of having enough and not losing it.

All forces, then, are making for the Servile State in this the final phase of
our evil Capitalist society in England. The generous reformer is canalised
towards it; the ungenerous one finds it a very mirror of his ideal; the herd of
“practical” men meet at every stage in its inception the “practical” steps which
they expected and demanded; while that proletarian mass upon whom the experiment
is being tried have lost the tradition of property and of freedom which might
resist the change, and are most powerfully inclined to its acceptance by the
positive benefits which it confers.

It may be objected that however true all this may be, no one can, upon such
theoretical grounds, regard the Servile State as something really approaching
us. We need not believe in its advent (we shall be told) until we see the first
effects of its action.

To this I answer that the first effects of its action are already apparent. The
Servile State is, in industrial England to-day, no longer a menace but something
in actual existence. It is in process of construction. The first main lines of
it are already plotted out; the cornerstone of it is already laid.

To see the truth of this it is enough to consider laws and projects of law, the
first of which we already enjoy, while the last will pass from project to
positive statute in due process of time.


Appendix on “Buying-Out”

There is an impression abroad among those who propose to expropriate the
Capitalist class for the benefit of the State, but who appreciate the
difficulties in the way of direct confiscation, that by spreading the process
over a sufficient number of years and pursuing it after a certain fashion
bearing all the outward appearances of a purchase, the expropriation could be
effected without the consequences and attendant difficulties of direct
confiscation. In other words, there is an impression that the State could
“buyout” the Capitalist class without their knowing it, and that in a sort of
painless way this class can be slowly conjured out of existence.

The impression is held in a confused fashion by most of those who cherish it,
and will not bear a clear analysis.

It is impossible by any jugglery to “buyout” the universality of the means of
production without confiscation.

To prove this, consider a concrete case which puts the problem in the simplest
terms:—

A community of twenty-two families lives upon the produce of two farms, the
property of only two families out of that twenty-two.

The remaining twenty families are Proletarian. The two families, with their
ploughs, stores, land, etc., are Capitalist.

The labour of the twenty proletarian families applied to the land and capital of
these two capitalist families produces 300 measures of wheat, of which 200
measures, or 10 measures each, form the annual support of the twenty proletarian
families; the remaining 100 measures are the surplus value retained as rent,
interest, and profit by the two Capitalist families, each of which has thus a
yearly income of 50 measures.

The State proposes to produce, after a certain length of time, a condition of
affairs such that the surplus values shall no longer go to the two Capitalist
families, but shall be distributed to the advantage of the whole community,
while it, the State, shall itself become the unembarrassed owner of both
farms.

Now capital is accumulated with the object of a certain return as the reward of
accumulation. Instead of spending his money, a man saves it with the object of
retaining as the result of that saving a certain yearly revenue. The measure of
this does not fall in a particular society at a particular time below a certain
level. In other words, if a man cannot get a certain minimum reward for his
accumulation, he will not accumulate but spend.

What is called in economics “The Law of Diminishing Returns” acts so that
continual additions to capital, other things being equal (that is, the methods
of production remaining the same), do not provide a corresponding increase of
revenue. A thousand measures of capital applied to a particular area of natural
forces will produce, for instance, 40 measures yearly, or 4 per cent.; but 2000
measures applied in the same fashion will not produce 80 measures. They will
produce more than the thousand measures did, but not more in proportion; not
double. They will produce, say, 60 measures, or 3 per cent., upon the capital.
The action of this universal principle automatically checks the accumulation of
capital when it has reached such a point that the proportionate return is the
least which a man will accept. If it falls below that he will spend rather than
accumulate. The limit of this minimum in any particular society at any
particular time gives the measure to what we call “the Effective Desire of
Accumulation.” Thus in England to-day it is a little over 3 per cent. The
minimum which limits the accumulation of capital is a minimum return of about
one-thirtieth yearly upon such capital, and this we may call for shortness the
“E.D.A.” of our society at the present time.

When, therefore, the Capitalist estimates the full value of his possessions, he
counts them in “so many years’ purchase.”* And that means that he is willing to
take in a lump sum down for his possessions so many times the yearly revenue
which he at present enjoys. If his E.D.A. is one-thirtieth, he will take a lump
sum representing thirty times his annual revenue.

* By an illusion which clever statesmanship could use to the advantage of the
community, he even estimates the natural forces he controls (which need no
accumulation, but are always present) on the analogy of his capital, and will
part with them at “so many years’ purchase.” It is by taking advantage of this
illusion that land purchase schemes (as in Ireland) happily work to the
advantage of the dispossessed.

So far so good. Let us suppose the two Capitalists in our example to have an
E.D.A. of one-thirtieth. They will sell to the State if the State can put up
3000 measures of wheat.

Now, of course, the State can do nothing of the kind. The accumulations of wheat
being already in the hands of the Capitalists, and those accumulations amounting
to much less than 3000 measures of wheat, the thing appears to be a
deadlock.

But it is not a deadlock if the Capitalist is a fool. The State can go to the
Capitalists and say: “Hand me over your farms, and against them I will give you
guarantee that you shall be paid rather more than 100 measures of wheat a year
for the thirty years. In fact, I will pay you half as much again until these
extra payments amount to a purchase of your original stock.”

Out of what does this extra amount come? Out of the State’s power to
tax.

The State can levy a tax upon the profits of both Capitalists A and B, and pay
them the extra with their own money.

In so simple an example it is evident that this “ringing of the changes” would
be spotted by the victims, and that they would bring against it precisely the
same forces which they would bring against the much simpler and more
straightforward process of immediate confiscation.

But it is argued that in a complex State, where you are dealing with myriads of
individual Capitalists and thousands of particular forms of profit, the process
can be masked.

There are two ways in which the State can mask its action (according to this
policy). It can buy out first one small area of land and capital out of the
general taxation and then another, and then another, until the whole has been
transferred; or it can tax with peculiar severity certain trades which the rest
who are left immune will abandon to their ruin, and with the general taxation
plus this special taxation buy out those unfortunate trades which will, of
course, have sunk heavily in value under the attack.

The second of these tricks will soon be apparent in any society, however
complex; for after one unpopular trade had been selected for attack the trying
on of the same methods in another less unpopular field will at once rouse
suspicion.*

* Thus you can raid the brewers in a society half-Puritan where brewing is
thought immoral by many, but proceed to railway stock and it will be a very
different matter.

The first method, however, might have some chance of success, at least for a
long time after it was begun, in a highly complex and numerous society were it
not for a certain check which comes in of itself. That check is the fact that
the Capitalist only takes more than his old yearly revenue with the object of
reinvesting the surplus.

I have a thousand pounds in Brighton railway stock, yielding me 3 per cent.: £30
a year. The Government asks me to exchange my bit of paper against another bit
of paper guaranteeing the payment of £50 a year, that is, an extra rate a year,
for so many years as will represent over and above the regular interest paid a
purchase of my stock. The Government’s bit of paper promises to pay to the
holder £50 a year for, say, thirty-eight years. I am delighted to make the
exchange, not because I am such a fool as to enjoy the prospect of my property
being extinguished at the end of thirty-eight years, but because I hope to be
able to reinvest the extra £20 every year in something else that will bring me
in 3 per cent. Thus, at the end of the thirty-eight years I shall (or my heirs)
be better off than I was at the beginning of the transaction, and I shall have
enjoyed during its maturing my old £30 a year all the same.

The State can purchase thus on a small scale by subsidising purchase out of the
general taxation. It can, therefore, play this trick over a small area and for a
short time with success. But the moment this area passes a very narrow limit the
“market for investment” is found to be restricted, Capital automatically takes
alarm, the State can no longer offer its paper guarantees save at an enhanced
price. If it tries to turn the position by further raising taxation to what
Capital regards as “confiscatory” rates, there will be opposed to its action
just the same forces as would be opposed to frank and open expropriation.

The matter is one of plain arithmetic, and all the confusion introduced by the
complex mechanism of “finance” can no more change the fundamental and
arithmetical principles involved than can the accumulation of triangles in an
ordnance survey reduce the internal angles of the largest triangle to less than
180 degrees.* In fine: if you desire to confiscate, you must confiscate.

* In using this metaphor I at once record my apologies to those who believe in
elliptical and hyperbolic universes, and confess myself an old-fashioned
parabolist. Further, I admit that the triangles in question are spherical.

You cannot outflank the enemy, as Financiers in the city and sharpers on the
racecourse outflank the simpler of mankind, nor can you conduct the general
process of expropriation upon a muddle-headed hope that somehow or other
something will come out of nothing in the end.

There are, indeed, two ways in which the State could expropriate without meeting
the resistance that must be present against any attempt at confiscation. But the
first of these ways is precarious, the second insufficient.

They are as follows:—

(1) The State can promise the Capitalist a larger yearly revenue than he is
getting in the expectation that it, the State, can manage the business better
than the Capitalist, or that some future expansion will come to its aid. In
other words, if the State makes a bigger profit out of the thing than the
Capitalist, it can buy out the Capitalist just as a private individual with a
similar business proposition can buy him out.

But the converse of this is that if the State has calculated badly, or has bad
luck, it would find itself endowing the Capitalists of the future instead of
gradually extinguishing them.

In this fashion the State could have “socialised” without confiscation the
railways of this country if it had taken them over fifty years ago, promising
the then owners more than they were then obtaining. But if it had socialised the
hansom cab in the nineties, it would now be supporting in perpetuity that worthy
but extinct type the cab-owner (and his children for ever) at the expense of the
community.

(2) The second way in which the State can expropriate without confiscation is by
annuity. It can say to such Capitalists as have no heirs or care little for
their fate if they have: “You have only got so much time to live and to enjoy
your £30, will you take £50 until you die?” Upon the bargain being accepted the
State will, in process of time, though not immediately upon the death of the
annuitant, become an unembarrassed owner of what had been the annuitant’s share
in the means of production. But the area over which this method can be exercised
is a very small one. It is not of itself a sufficient instrument for the
expropriation of any considerable field.

I need hardly add that as a matter of fact the so-called “Socialist” and
confiscatory measures of our time have nothing to do with the problem here
discussed. The State is indeed confiscating, that is, it is taxing in many cases
in such a fashion as to impoverish the taxpayer and is lessening his capital
rather than shearing his income. But it is not putting the proceeds into the
means of production. It is either using them for immediate consumption in the
shape of new official salaries or handing them over to another set of
Capitalists.*

* Thus the money levied upon the death of some not very wealthy squire and
represented by, say, locomotives in the Argentine, turns into two miles of
palings for the pleasant back gardens of a thousand new officials under the
Inebriates Bill, or is simply handed over to the shareholders of the Prudential
under the Insurance Act. In the first case the locomotives have been given back
to the Argentine, and after a long series of exchanges have been bartered
against a great number of wood-palings from the Baltic not exactly reproductive
wealth. In the second case the locomotives which used to be the squire’s hands
become, or their equivalent becomes, means of production in the hands of the
Sassoons.

But these practical considerations of the way in which sham Socialist
experiments are working belong rather to my next section, in which I shall deal
with the actual beginnings of the Servile State in our midst.




Section Nine
The Servile State Has Begun


In this last division of my book I deal with the actual appearance of the
Servile State in certain laws and proposals now familiar to the Industrial
Society of modern England. These are the patent objects, “laws and projects of
laws,” which lend stuff to my argument, and show that it is based not upon a
mere deduction, but upon an observation of things.

Two forms of this proof are evident: first, the laws and proposals which subject
the Proletariat to Servile conditions; next, the fact that the Capitalist, so
far from being expropriated by modern “Socialist” experiments, is being
confirmed in his power.

I take these in their order, and I begin by asking in what statutes or proposals
the Servile State first appeared among us.

A false conception of our subject might lead one to find the origins of the
Servile State in the restrictions imposed upon certain forms of manufacture, and
the corresponding duties laid upon the Capitalist in the interest of his
workmen. The Factory Laws, as they are in this country, would seem to offer upon
this superficial and erroneous view a starting point. They do nothing of the
kind; and the view is superficial and erroneous because it neglects the
fundamentals of the case. What distinguishes the Servile State is not the
interference of law with the action of any citizen even in connection with
industrial matters. Such interference may or may not indicate the presence of a
Servile status. It in no way indicates the presence of that status when it
forbids a particular kind of human action to be undertaken by the citizen as a
citizen.

The legislator says, for instance, “You may pluck roses; but as I notice that
you sometimes scratch yourself, I will put you in prison unless you cut them
with scissors at least 122 millimetres long, and I will appoint one thousand
inspectors to go round the country seeing whether the law is observed. My
brother-in-law shall be at the head of the Department at £2,000 a
year.”

We are all familiar with that type of legislation. We are all familiar with the
arguments for and against it in any particular case. We may regard it as
onerous, futile, or beneficent, or in any other light, according to our various
temperaments. But it does not fall within the category of servile legislation,
because it establishes no distinction between two classes of citizens, marking
off the one as legally distinct from the other by a criterion of manual labour
or of income.

This is even true of such regulations as those which compel a Cotton Mill, for
instance, to have no less than such and such an amount of cubic space for each
operative, and such and such protection for dangerous machinery. These laws do
not concern themselves with the nature, the amount, or even the existence of a
contract for service. The object, for example, of the law which compels one to
fence off certain types of machinery is simply to protect human life, regardless
of whether the human being so protected is rich or poor, Capitalist or
Proletarian. These laws may in effect work in our society so that the Capitalist
is made responsible for the Proletarian, but he is not responsible quâ
Capitalist, nor is the Proletarian protected quâ Proletarian.

In the same way the law may compel me, if I am a Riparian owner, to put up a
fence of statutory strength wherever the water of my river is of more than a
statutory depth. Now it cannot compel me to do this unless I am the owner of the
land. In a sense, therefore, this might be called the recognition of my Status,
because, by the nature of the case, only landowners can be affected by the law,
and landowners would be compelled by it to safeguard the lives of all, whether
they were or were not owners of land.

But the category so established would be purely accidental. The object and
method of the law do not concern themselves with a distinction between
citizens.

A close observer might indeed discover certain points in the Factory laws,
details and phrases, which did distinctly connote the existence of a Capitalist
and of a Proletarian class. But we must take the statutes as a whole and the
order in which they were produced, above all, the general motive and expressions
governing each main statute, in order to judge whether such examples of
interference give us an origin or not.

The verdict will be that they do not. Such legislation may be oppressive in any
degree or necessary in any degree, but it does not establish status in the place
of contract, and it is not, therefore, servile.

Neither are those laws servile which in practice attach to the poor and not to
the rich. Compulsory education is in legal theory required of every citizen for
his children. The state of mind which goes with plutocracy exempts of course all
above a certain standard of wealth from this law. But the law does apply to the
universality of the commonwealth, and all families resident in Great Britain
(not in Ireland) are subject to its provisions.

These are not origins. A true origin to the legislation I approach comes later.
The first example of servile legislation to be discovered upon the Statute Book
is that which establishes the present form of Employer’s Liability.

I am far from saying that that law was passed, as modern laws are beginning to
be passed, with the direct object of establishing a new status; though it was
passed with some consciousness on the part of the legislator that such a new
status was in existence as a social fact. Its motive was merely humane, and the
relief which it afforded seemed merely necessary at the time; but it is an
instructive example of the way in which a small neglect of strict doctrine and a
slight toleration of anomaly admit great changes into the State.

There had existed from all time in every community, and there was founded upon
common sense, the legal doctrine that if one citizen was so placed with regard
to another by contract that he must in the fulfilment of that contract perform
certain services, and if those services accidentally involved damages to a third
party, not the actual perpetrator of the damage, but he who designed the
particular operation leading to it was responsible.

The point is subtle, but, as I say, fundamental. It involved no distinction of
status between employer and employed.

Citizen A offered citizen B a sack of wheat down if citizen B would plough for
him a piece of land which might or might not produce more than a sack of
wheat.

Of course citizen A expected it would produce more, and was awaiting a surplus
value, or he would not have made the contract with citizen B. But, at any rate,
citizen B put his name to the agreement, and as a free man, capable of
contracting, was correspondingly bound to fulfil it.

In fulfilling this contract the ploughshare B is driving destroys a pipe
conveying water by agreement through A’s land to C. C suffers damage, and to
recover the equivalent of that damage his action in justice and common sense can
only be against A, for B was carrying out a plan and instruction of which A was
the author. C is a third party who had nothing to do with such a contract and
could not possibly have justice save by his chances of getting it from A, who
was the true author of the unintentional loss inflicted, since he designed the
course of work.

But when the damage is not done to C at all, but to B, who is concerned with a
work the risks of which are known and willingly undertaken, it is quite another
matter.

Citizen A contracts with citizen B that citizen B, in consideration of a sack of
wheat, shall plough a bit of land. Certain known risks must attach to that
operation. Citizen B, if he is a free man, undertakes those risks with his eyes
open. For instance, he may sprain his wrist in turning the plough, or one of the
horses may kick him while he is having his bread-and-cheese. If upon such an
accident A is compelled to pay damages to B, a difference of status is at once
recognised. B undertook to do work which, by all the theory of free contract,
was, with its risks and its expense of energy, the equivalent in B’s own eyes of
a sack of wheat; yet a law is passed to say that B can have more than that sack
of wheat if he is hurt.

There is no converse right of A against B. If the employer suffers by such an
accident to the employee, he is not allowed to dock that sack of wheat, though
it was regarded in the contract as the equivalent to a certain amount of labour
to be performed which, as a fact, has not been performed. A has no action unless
B has been culpably negligent or remiss. In other words, the mere fact that one
man is working and the other not is the fundamental consideration on which the
law is built, and the law says: “You are not a free man making a free contract
with all its consequences. You are a worker, and therefore an inferior: you are
an employee; and that status gives you a special position which would not be
recognised in the other party to the contract.”

The principle is pushed still further when an employer is made liable for an
accident happening to one of his employees at the hands of another
employee.

A gives a sack of wheat to B and D each if they will dig a well for him. All
three parties are cognisant of the risks and accept them in the contract. B,
holding the rope on which D is lowered, lets it slip. If they were all three men
of exactly equal status, obviously D’s action would be against B. But they are
not of equal status in England to-day. B and D are employees, and are therefore
in a special and inferior position before the law compared with their employer
A. D’s action is, by this novel principle, no longer against B, who accidentally
injured him by a personal act, however involuntary, for which a free man would
be responsible, but against A, who was innocent of the whole business.

Now in all this it is quite clear that A has peculiar duties not because he is a
citizen, but because he is something more: an employer; and B and D have special
claims on A, not because they are citizens, but because they are something less:
viz. employees. They can claim protection from A, as inferiors of a superior in
a State admitting such distinctions and patronage.

It will occur at once to the reader that in our existing social state the
employee will be very grateful for such legislation. One workman cannot recover
from another simply because the other will have no goods out of which to pay
damages. Let the burden, therefore, fall upon the rich man!

Excellent. But that is not the point. To argue thus is to say that Servile
legislation is necessary if we are to solve the problems raised by Capitalism.
It remains servile legislation none the less. It is legislation that would not
exist in a society where property was well divided and where a citizen could
normally pay damages for the harm he had himself caused.*

* How true it is that the idea of status underlies this legislation can easily
be tested by taking parallel cases, in one of which working men are concerned,
in the other the professional class. If I contract to write for a publisher a
complete History of the County of Rutland, and in the pursuit of that task,
while examining some object of historical interest, fall down a pit, I should
not be able to recover against the publisher. But if I dress in mean clothes,
and the same publisher, deceived, gives me a month’s work at cleaning out his
ornamental water and I am wounded in that occupation by a fierce fish, he will
be mulcted to my advantage, and that roundly.

This first trickle of the stream, however, though it is of considerable
historical interest as a point of departure, is not of very definite moment to
our subject compared with the great bulk of later proposals, some of which are
already law, others upon the point of becoming law, and which definitely
recognise the Servile State, the re-establishment of status in the place of
contract, and the universal division of citizens into two categories of
employers and employed.

These last merit a very different consideration, for they will represent to
history the conscious and designed entry of Servile Institutions into the old
Christian State. They are not “origins,” small indications of coming change
which the historian will painfully discover as a curiosity. They are the
admitted foundations of a new order, deliberately planned by a few, confusedly
accepted by the many, as the basis upon which a novel and stable society shall
arise to replace the unstable and passing phase of Capitalism.

They fall roughly into three categories:—

(1) Measures by which the insecurity of the proletariat shall be relieved
through the action of the employing class, or of the proletariat itself acting
under compulsion.

(2) Measures by which the employer shall be compelled to give not less than a
certain minimum for any labour he may purchase, and

(3) Measures which compel a man lacking the means of production to labour,
though he may have made no contract to that effect.

The last two, as will be seen in a moment, are complementary one of
another.

As to the first: Measures to palliate the insecurity of the proletariat.

We have of this an example in actual law at this moment. And that law the
Insurance Act (whose political source and motive I am not here discussing)
follows in every particular the lines of a Servile State.

(a) Its fundamental criterion is employment. In other words, I am compelled to
enter a scheme providing me against the mischances of illness and unemployment
not because I am a citizen, but only if I am:

(1) Exchanging services for goods; and either

(2) Obtaining less than a certain amount of goods for those services,
or

(3) A vulgar fellow working with his hands. The law carefully excludes from its
provisions those forms of labour to which the educated and therefore powerful
classes are subject,and further excludes from compulsion the mass of those who
are for the moment earning enough to make them a class to be reckoned with as
economically free. I may be a writer of books who, should he fall ill, will
leave in the greatest distress the family which he supports. If the legislator
were concerned for the morals of citizens, I should most undoubtedly come under
this law, under the form of a compulsory insurance added to my income tax. But
the legislator is not concerned with people of my sort. He is concerned with a
new status which he recognises in the State, to wit, the proletariat. He
envisages the proletariat not quite accurately as men either poor, or, if they
are not poor, at any rate vulgar people working with their hands, and he
legislates accordingly.

(b) Still more striking,as an example of status taking the place of contract, is
the fact that this law puts the duty of controlling the proletariat and of
seeing that the law is obeyed not upon the proletariat itself, but upon the
Capitalist class.

Now this point is of an importance that cannot be exaggerated.

The future historian, whatever his interest in the first indications of that
profound revolution through which we are so rapidly passing, will most certainly
fix upon that one point as the cardinal landmark of our times. The legislator
surveying the Capitalist State proposes as a remedy for certain of its evils the
establishment of two categories in the State, compels the lower man to
registration, to a tax, and the rest of it, and further compels the upper man to
be the instrument in enforcing that registration and in collecting that tax. No
one acquainted with the way in which any one of the great changes of the past
has taken place, the substitution of tenure for the Roman proprietary right in
land, or the substitution of the mediæval peasant for the serf of the Dark Ages,
can possibly misunderstand the significance of such a turning point in our
history.

Whether it will be completed or whether a reaction will destroy it is another
matter. Its mere proposal is of the greatest possible moment in the inquiry we
are here pursuing.

Of the next two groups, the fixing of a Minimum Wage and the Compulsion to
Labour (which, as I have said, and will shortly show, are complementary one to
the other), neither has yet appeared in actual legislation, but both are
planned, both thought out, both possessed of powerful advocates, and both upon
the threshold of positive law.

The fixing of a Minimum Wage, with a definite sum fixed by statute, has not yet
entered our laws, but the first step towards such a consummation has been taken
in the shape of giving legal sanction to some hypothetical Minimum Wage which
shall be arrived at after discussion within a particular trade. That trade is,
of course, the mining industry. The law does not say: “No Capitalist shall pay a
miner less than so many shillings for so many hours’ work.” But it does say:
“Figures having been arrived at by local boards, any miner working within the
area of each board can claim by force of law the minimum sum established by such
boards.” It is evident that from this step to the next, which shall define some
sliding scale of remuneration for labour according to prices and the profits of
capital, is an easy and natural transition. It would give both parties what each
immediately requires: to capital a guarantee against disturbance; to labour
sufficiency and security. The whole thing is an excellent object lesson in
little of that general movement from free contract to status, and from the
Capitalist to the Servile State, which is the tide of our time.

The neglect of older principles as abstract and doctrinaire; the immediate need
of both parties immediately satisfied; the unforeseen but necessary consequence
of satisfying such needs in such a fashion— all these, which are apparent in the
settlement the mining industry has begun, are the typical forces producing the
Servile State.

Consider in its largest aspect the nature of such a settlement.

The Proletarian accepts a position in which he produces for the Capitalist a
certain total of economic values, and retains out of that total a portion only,
leaving to the Capitalist all surplus value. The Capitalist, on his side, is
guaranteed in the secure and permanent expectation of that surplus value through
all the perils of social envy; the Proletarian is guaranteed in a sufficiency
and a security for that sufficiency; but by the very action of such a guarantee
there is withdrawn from him the power to refuse his labour and thus to aim at
putting himself in possession of the means of production.

Such schemes definitely divide citizens into two classes,the Capitalist and the
Proletarian. They make it impossible for the second to combat the privileged
position of the first. They introduce into the positive laws of the community a
recognition of social facts which already divide Englishmen into two groups of
economically more free and economically less free, and they stamp with the
authority of the State a new constitution of society. Society is recognised as
no longer consisting of free men bargaining freely for their labour or any other
commodity in their possession, but of two contrasting status, owners and
non-owners. The first must not be allowed to leave the second without
subsistence; the second must not be allowed to obtain that grip upon the means
of production which is the privilege of the first. It is true that this first
experiment is small in degree and tentative in quality; but to judge the
movement as a general whole we must not only consider the expression it has
actually received so far in positive law, but the mood of our time.

When this first experiment in a minimum wage was being debated in Parliament,
what was the great issue of debate? Upon what did those who were the most ardent
reformers particularly insist? Not that the miners should have an avenue open to
them for obtaining possession of the mines; not even that the State should have
an avenue open to it for obtaining such possession; but that the minimum wage
should be fixed at a certain satisfactory level! That, as our recent experience
testifies for all of us, was the crux of the quarrel. And that such a point
should be the crux, not the socialisation of the mines, nor the admission of the
proletariat to the means of production, but only a sufficiency and a security of
wage, is amply significant of the perhaps irresistible forces which are making
in the direction for which I argue in this book.

There was here no attempt of the Capitalist to impose Servile conditions nor of
the Proletarian to resist them. Both parties were agreed upon that fundamental
change. The discussion turned upon the minimum limit of subsistence to be
securely provided, a point which left aside, because it took for granted, the
establishment of some minimum in any case.

Next, let it be noted (for it is of moment to a later part of my argument) that
experiments of this sort promise to extend piecemeal. There is no likelihood,
judging by men’s actions and speech, of some grand general scheme for the
establishment of a minimum wage throughout the community. Such a scheme would,
of course, be as truly an establishment of the Servile State as piecemeal
schemes. But, as we shall see in a moment, the extension of the principle
piecemeal has a considerable effect upon the forms which compulsion may
take.

The miners’ refusal to work, with the exaggerated panic it caused, bred this
first tentative appearance of the minimum wage in our laws. Normally, capital
prefers free labour with its margin of destitution; for such an anarchy,
ephemeral though it is of its nature, while it lasts provides cheap labour; from
the narrowest point of view it provides in the still competitive areas of
Capitalism a better chance for profits.

But as one group of workmen after another, concerned with trades immediately
necessary to the life of the nation, and therefore tolerating but little
interruption, learn the power which combination gives them, it is inevitable
that the legislator (concentrated as he is upon momentary remedies for
difficulties as they arise) should propose for one such trade after another the
remedy of a minimum wage.

There can be little doubt that, trade by trade, the principle will extend. For
instance, the two and a half millions now guaranteed against unemployment are
guaranteed against it for a certain weekly sum. That weekly sum must bear some
relation to their estimated earnings when they are in employment.

It is a short step from the calculation of unemployment benefit (its being fixed
by statute at a certain level, and that level determined by something which is
regarded as the just remuneration of labour in that trade); it is a short step,
I say, from that to a statutory fixing of the sums paid during employment.

The State says to the Serf: “I saw to it that you should have so much when you
were unemployed. I find that in some rare cases my arrangement leads to your
getting more when you are unemployed than when you are employed. I further find
that in many cases, though you get more when you are employed, yet the
difference is not sufficient to tempt a lazy man to work, or to make him take
any particular trouble to get work. I must see to this.”

The provision of a fixed schedule during unemployment thus inevitably leads to
the examination, the defining, and at last the imposition of a minimum wage
during employment; and every compulsory provision for unemployed benefits is the
seed of a minimum wage.

Of still greater effect is the mere presence of State regulation in such a
matter. The fact that the State has begun to gather statistics of wages over
these large areas of industry, and to do so not for a mere statistical object,
but a practical one, and the fact that the State has begun to immix the action
of positive law and constraint with the older system of free bargaining, mean
that the whole weight of its influence is now in favour of regulation. It is no
rash prophecy to assert that in the near future our industrial society will see
a gradually extending area of industry in which from two sides the fixing of
wages by statute shall appear. From the one side it will come in the form of the
State examining the conditions of labour in connection with its own schemes for
establishing sufficiency and security by insurance. From the other side it will
come through the reasonable proposals to make contracts between groups of labour
and groups of capital enforceable in the Courts.

So much, then, for the Principle of a Minimum Wage. It has already appeared in
our laws. It is certain to spread. But how does the presence of this
introduction of a Minimum form part of the advance towards the Servile
State?

I have said that the principle of a minimum wage involves as its converse the
principle of compulsory labour. Indeed, most of the importance which the
principle of a minimum wage has for this inquiry lies in that converse necessity
of compulsory labour which it involves.

But as the connection between the two may not be clear at first sight, we must
do more than take it for granted. We must establish it by process of
reason.

There are two distinct forms in which the whole policy of enforcing security and
sufficiency by law for the proletariat produce a corresponding policy of
compulsory labour.

The first of these forms is the compulsion which the Courts will exercise upon
either of the parties concerned in the giving and in the receiving of the
minimum wage. The second form is the necessity under which society will find
itself, when once the principle of the minimum wage is conceded, coupled with
the principle of sufficiency and security, to maintain those whom the minimum
wage excludes from the area of normal employment.

As to the first form:—

A Proletarian group has struck a bargain with a group of Capitalists to the
effect that it will produce for that capital ten measures of value in a year,
will be content to receive six measures of value for itself, and will leave four
measures as surplus value for the Capitalists. The bargain is ratified; the
Courts have the power to enforce it. If the Capitalists by some trick of fines
or by bluntly breaking their word pay out in wages less than the six measures,
the Courts must have some power of constraining them. In other words, there must
be some sanction to the action of the law. There must be some power of
punishment, and, through punishment, of compulsion. Conversely, if the men,
having struck this bargain, go back upon their word; if individuals among them
or sections among them cease work with a new demand for seven measures instead
of six, the Courts must have the power of constraining and of punishing them.
Where the bargain is ephemeral or at any rate extended over only reasonable
limits of time, it would be straining language perhaps to say that each
individual case of constraint exercised against the workmen would be a case of
compulsory labour. But extend the system over a long period of years, make it
normal to industry and accepted as a habit in men’s daily conception of the way
in which their lives should be conducted, and the method is necessarily
transformed into a system of compulsory labour. In trades where wages fluctuate
little this will obviously be the case. “You, the agricultural labourers of this
district, have taken fifteen shillings a week for a very long time. It has
worked perfectly well. There seems no reason why you should have more. Nay, you
put your hands to it through your officials in the year so and so that you
regarded that sum as sufficient. Such and such of your members are now refusing
to perform what this Court regards as a contract. They must return within the
limits of that contract or suffer the consequences.”

Remember what power analogy exercises over men’s minds, and how, when systems of
the sort are common to many trades, they will tend to create a general point of
view for all trades. Remember also how comparatively slight a threat is already
sufficient to control men in our industrial society, the proletarian mass of
which is accustomed to live from week to week under peril of discharge, and has
grown readily amenable to the threat of any reduction in those wages upon which
it can but just subsist.

Nor are the Courts enforcing such contracts or quasi-contracts (as they will
come to be regarded) the only inducement.

A man has been compelled by law to put aside sums from his wages as insurance
against unemployment. But he is no longer the judge of how such sums shall be
used. They are not in his possession; they are not even in the hands of some
society which he can really control. They are in the hands of a Government
official. “Here is work offered you at twenty-five shillings a week. If you do
not take it you certainly shall not have a right to the money you have been
compelled to put aside. If you will take it the sum shall still stand to your
credit, and when next in my judgment your unemployment is not due to your
recalcitrance and refusal to labour, I will permit you to have some of your
money: not otherwise.” Dovetailing in with this machinery of compulsion is all
that mass of registration and docketing which is accumulating through the use of
Labour Exchanges. Not only will the Official have the power to enforce special
contracts, or the power to coerce individual men to labour under the threat of a
fine, but he will also have a series of dossiers by which the record of each
workman can be established. No man, once so registered and known, can escape;
and, of the nature of the system, the numbers caught in the net must steadily
increase until the whole mass of labour is mapped out and controlled.

These are very powerful instruments of compulsion indeed. They already exist.
They are already a part of our laws.

Lastly, there is the obvious bludgeon of “compulsory arbitration”: a bludgeon so
obvious that it is revolting even to our proletariat. Indeed, I know of no
civilised European state which has succumbed to so gross a suggestion. For it is
a frank admission of servitude at one step, and for good and all, such as men of
our culture are not yet prepared to swallow.*

* But it has twice been brought forward in due process as a Bill in
Parliament!

So much, then, for the first argument and the first form in which compulsory
labour is seen to be a direct and necessary consequence of establishing a
minimum wage and of scheduling employment to a scale.

The second is equally clear. In the production of wheat the healthy and skilled
man who can produce ten measures of wheat is compelled to work for six measures,
and the Capitalist is compelled to remain content with four measures for his
share. The law will punish him if he tries to get out of his legal obligation
and to pay his workmen less than six measures of wheat during the year. What of
the man who is not sufficiently strong or skilled to produce even six measures?
Will the Capitalist be constrained to pay him more than the values he can
produce? Most certainly not. The whole structure of production as it was erected
during the Capitalist phase of our industry has been left intact by the new laws
and customs. Profit is still left a necessity. If it were destroyed, still more
if a loss were imposed by law, that would be a contradiction of the whole spirit
in which all these reforms are being undertaken. They are being undertaken with
the object of establishing stability where there is now instability, and of
“reconciling,” as the ironic phrase goes, “the interests of capital and labour.”
It would be impossible, without a general ruin, to compel capital to lose upon
the man who is not worth even the minimum wage. How shall that element of
insecurity and instability be eliminated? To support the man gratuitously
because he cannot earn a minimum wage, when all the rest of the commonwealth is
working for its guaranteed wages, is to put a premium upon incapacity and sloth.
The man must be made to work. He must be taught, if possible, to produce those
economic values, which are regarded as the minimum of sufficiency. He must be
kept at that work even if he cannot produce the minimum, lest his presence as a
free labourer should imperil the whole scheme of the minimum wage, and introduce
at the same time a continuous element of instability. Hence he is necessarily a
subject for forced labour. We have not yet in this country, established by force
of law, the right to this form of compulsion, but it is an inevitable
consequence of those other reforms which have just been reviewed. The “Labour
Colony” (a prison so called because euphemism is necessary to every transition)
will be erected to absorb this surplus, and that last form of compulsion will
crown the edifice of these reforms. They will then be complete so far as the
subject classes are concerned, and even though this particular institution of
the “Labour Colony” (logically the last of all) precede in time other forms of
compulsion, it will make the advent of those other forms of compulsion more
certain, facile, and rapid.

There remains one last remark to be made upon the concrete side of my subject. I
have in this last section illustrated the tendency towards the Servile State
from actual laws and actual projects with which all are to-day familiar in
English industrial society, and I have shown how these are certainly
establishing the proletariat in a novel, but to them satisfactory, Servile
Status.

It remains to point out in a very few lines the complementary truth that what
should be the very essence of Collectivist Reform, to wit, the translation of
the means of production from the hands of private owners to the hands of public
officials, is nowhere being attempted. So far from its being attempted, all
so-called “Socialistic” experiments in municipalisation and nationalisation are
merely increasing the dependence of the community upon the Capitalist class. To
prove this, we need only observe that every single one of these experiments is
effected by a loan.

Now what is meant in economic reality by these municipal loans and national
loans raised for the purpose of purchasing certain small sections of the means
of production?

Certain Capitalists own a number of rails, cars, etc. They put to work upon
these certain Proletarians, and the result is a certain total of economic
values. Let the surplus values obtainable by the Capitalists after the
subsistence of the proletarians is provided for amount to £10,000 a year. We all
know how a system of this sort is “Municipalised.” A “loan” is raised. It bears
“interest.” It is saddled with a “sinking fund.”

Now this loan is not really made in money, though the terms of it are in money.
It is, at the end of a long string of exchanges, nothing more nor less than the
loan of the cars, the rails, etc., by the Capitalists to the Municipality. And
the Capitalists require, before they will strike the bargain, a guarantee that
the whole of their old profit shall be paid to them, together with a further
yearly sum, which after a certain number of years shall represent the original
value of the concern when they handed it over. These last additional sums are
called the “sinking fund”; the continued payment of the old surplus values is
called the “interest.”

In theory certain small sections of the means of production might be acquired in
this way. That particular section would have been “socialised.” The “Sinking
Fund” (that is, the paying of the Capitalists for their plant by instalments)
might be met out of the general taxation imposed on the community, considering
how large that is compared with any one experiment of the kind. The “interest”
may by good management be met out of the true profits of the tramways. At the
end of a certain number of years the community will be in possession of the
tramways, will no longer be exploited in this particular by Capitalism, will
have bought out Capitalism from the general taxes, and, in so far as the
purchase money paid has been consumed and not saved or invested by the
Capitalists, a small measure of “socialisation” will have been achieved.

As a fact things are never so favourable.

In practice three conditions militate against even these tiny experiments in
expropriation: the fact that the implements are always sold at much more than
their true value; the fact that the purchase includes non-productive things; and
the fact that the rate of borrowing is much faster than the rate of repayment.
These three adverse conditions lead in practice to nothing but the riveting of
Capitalism more securely round the body of the State.

For what is it that is paid for when a tramway, for instance, is taken over? Is
it the true capital alone, the actual plant, which is paid for, even at an
exaggerated price? Far from it! Over and above the rails and the cars, there are
all the commissions that have been made, all the champagne luncheons, all the
lawyers’ fees, all the compensations to this man and to that man, all the
bribes. Nor does this exhaust the argument. Tramways represent a productive
investment. What about pleasure gardens, wash-houses, baths, libraries,
monuments, and the rest? The greater part of these things are the product of
“loans.” When you put up a public institution you borrow the bricks and the
mortar and the iron and the wood and the tiles from Capitalists, and you pledge
yourself to pay interest, and to produce a sinking fund precisely as though a
town hall or a bath were a piece of reproductive machinery.

To this must be added the fact that a considerable proportion of the purchases
are failures: purchases of things just before they are driven out by some new
invention; while on the top of the whole business you have the fact that the
borrowing goes on at a far greater rate than the repayment.

In a word, all these experiments up and down Europe during our generation,municipal
and national, have resulted in an indebtedness to capital increasing rather more
than twice, but not three times, as fast as the rate of repayment. The interest
which capital demands with a complete indifference as to whether the loan is
productive or non-productive amounts to rather more than 1½ per cent.excess over
the produce of the various experiments, even though we count in the most
lucrative and successful of these, such as the state railways of many countries,
and the thoroughly successful municipal enterprises of many modern
towns.

Capitalism has seen to it that it shall be a winner and not a loser by this form
of sham Socialism, as by every other. And the same forces which in practice
forbid confiscation see to it that the attempt to mask confiscation by purchase
shall not only fail, but shall turn against those who have not had the courage
to make a frontal attack upon privilege.

With these concrete examples showing how Collectivism, in attempting its
practice, does but confirm the Capitalist position, and showing how our laws
have already begun to impose a Servile Status upon the Proletariat, I end the
argumentative thesis of this book.

I believe I have proved my case.

The future of industrial society, and in particular of English society, left to
its own direction, is a future in which subsistence and security shall be
guaranteed for the Proletariat, but shall be guaranteed at the expense of the
old political freedom and by the establishment of that Proletariat in a status
really, though not nominally, servile. At the same time, the Owners will be
guaranteed in their profits, the whole machinery of production in the smoothness
of its working, and that stability which has been lost under the Capitalist
phase of society will be found once more.

The internal strains which have threatened society during its Capitalist phase
will be relaxed and eliminated, and the community will settle down upon that
Servile basis which was its foundation before the advent of the Christian faith,
from which that faith slowly weaned it, and to which in the decay of that faith
it naturally returns.


Conclusion
It is possible to portray a great social movement of the past with accuracy and
in detail if one can spare to the task the time necessary for research and
further bring to it a certain power of co-ordination by which a great mass of
detail can be integrated and made one whole.

Such a task is rarely accomplished, but it does not exceed the powers of
history.

With regard to the future it is otherwise. No one can say even in its largest
aspect or upon its chief structural line what that future will be. He can only
present the main tendencies of his time: he can only determine the equation of
the curve and presume that that equation will apply more or less to its next
developments.

So far as I can judge, those societies which broke with the continuity of
Christian civilisation in the sixteenth century—which means, roughly, North
Germany and Great Britain—tend at present to the re-establishment of a Servile
Status. It will be diversified by local accident, modified by local character,
hidden under many forms. But it will come.

That the mere Capitalist anarchy cannot endure is patent to all men. That only a
very few possible solutions to it exist should be equally patent to all. For my
part, as I have said in these pages, I do not believe there are more than two: a
reaction towards well-divided property, or the re-establishment of servitude. I
cannot believe that theoretical Collectivism, now so plainly failing, will ever
inform a real and living society.

But my conviction that the re-establishment of the Servile Status in industrial
society is actually upon us does not lead me to any meagre and mechanical
prophecy of what the future of Europe shall be. The force of which I have been
speaking is not the only force in the field. There is a complex knot of forces
underlying any nation once Christian; a smouldering of the old fires.

Moreover, one can point to European societies which will most certainly reject
any such solution of our Capitalist problem, just as the same societies have
either rejected, or lived suspicious of, Capitalism itself, and have rejected or
lived suspicious of that industrial organisation which till lately identified
itself with “progress” and national well-being.

These societies are in the main the same as those which, in that great storm of
the sixteenth century,— the capital episode in the story of Christendom—held
fast to tradition and saved the continuity of morals. Chief among them should be
noted to-day the French and the Irish.

I would record it as an impression and no more that the Servile State, strong as
the tide is making for it in Prussia and in England to-day, will be modified,
checked, perhaps defeated in war, certainly haltedin its attempt to establish
itself completely, by the strong reaction which these freer societies upon its
flank will perpetually exercise.

Ireland has decided for a free peasantry, and our generation has seen the solid
foundation of that institution laid. In France the many experiments which
elsewhere have successfully introduced the Servile State have been
contemptuously rejected by the populace,and (most significant!) a recent attempt
to register and to “insure” the artisans as a separate category of citizens has
broken down in the face of an universal and a virile contempt.

That this second factor in the development of the future, the presence of free
societies, will destroy the tendency to the Servile State elsewhere I do not
affirm, but I believe that it will modify that tendency, certainly by example
and perhaps by direct attack. And as I am upon the whole hopeful that the Faith
will recover its intimate and guiding place in the heart of Europe, so I believe
that this sinking back into our original Paganism (for the tendency to the
Servile State is nothing less) will in due time be halted and reversed.

Videat Deus.
